Title: Validity-Preserving Hierarchical RL for Joint Routing and Switch Placement in EDA

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.39749v1

Published Time: Thu, 01 Oct 2026 01:47:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

Dorian Gailhard 1, Ugo Lecerf 2, Enzo Tartaglione 1, Donatello Conte 2, Lirida Naviner 1, Jhony H. Giraldo 11LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France 2Arteris IP 

> 1

{name.surname}@telecom-paris.fr 2{name.surname}@arteris.com 

October 1, 2026 

ABSTRACT 

Routing and switch placement are fundamental combinatorial optimization problems in chip design, requiring the joint optimization of routing topology and physical placement under strict structural, ge-ometric and logical constraints. Existing approaches typically rely on carefully engineered heuristics that incorporate strong problem-specific biases to navigate the enormous space of possible designs. In this work, we introduce a hierarchical reinforcement learning framework for joint routing and switch placement at the level of logical communication routes. Starting from a minimal routing graph, our method progressively constructs increasingly expressive solutions through three coupled operations: 

switch expansion , switch placement , and route refinement . These operations preserve routing valid-ity by construction, restricting exploration to feasible configurations where every communicating initiator-target pair has one assigned loop-free route. We explore the induced solution space using Gumbel Monte Carlo Tree Search, showing that neural-guided search substantially improves solution quality over non-learning optimization methods. Furthermore, pretraining across floorplans provides a strong initialization for fine-tuning on unseen instances. 

1 Introduction 

Routing and placement are central optimization problems in modern chip design. Given a set of communicating components and their physical environment, routing must establish connections while optimizing objectives such as wirelength and congestion under physical and topological constraints [1, 2]. These problems are combinatorial: the routing structure, the switch locations, and the individual communication routes interact, and even restricted Steiner-type formulations arising in Very-Large-Scale Integration (VLSI) design are computationally hard [3, 4]. Classical approaches address the complexity stemming from Electronic Design Automation (EDA) through carefully designed combinatorial optimization procedures and domain-specific heuristics [5, 2, 6]. Learning-based methods, and Reinforcement Learning (RL) in particular, provide an alternative in which the strategy used to explore a combinatorial design space can itself be learned. Recent successes in placement and routing demonstrate the potential of this approach for chip design [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Routing and switch placement are tightly coupled: switch locations determine which routing structures are effective, while the routing structure determines which switch locations are useful . Optimizing these decisions sequentially can therefore sacrifice solution quality by committing to decisions before accounting for their effect on the other problem. We instead optimize routing and switch placement jointly. We deliberately study a simplified physical model that captures the interaction between shared routing topology, switch placement, and communication routes while abstracting away constraints such as routing layers, capacities, vias, and detailed design rules. We view this formulation as a first step toward an optimization core that can subsequently be extended with richer physical constraints and cost models. In this work, we introduce a hierarchical construction process that progressively builds solutions through three operations: 

i) switch expansion , which introduces a new switch; ii) switch placement , which assigns its physical location; and iii) arXiv:2609.39749v1 [cs.LG] 30 Sep 2026 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

route refinement , which updates the routes affected by the expansion. The resulting hierarchy restricts exploration to a subset of feasible solutions while ensuring that a globally optimal solution remains reachable, thereby reducing the search space without prescribing how it should be explored. We formulate this construction process as a sequential decision problem and learn graph policies to guide exploration using Gumbel Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [13]. Finally, we train a policy jointly across floorplans and study whether the resulting initialization can accelerate optimization on previously unseen instances. Our contributions are as follows: • We introduce a hierarchical graph formulation for joint routing and switch placement that restricts search to feasible configurations while ensuring that a globally optimal solution remains reachable (Section 4). • We combine this formulation with a learned graph policy and Gumbel MCTS, and show that the resulting search can exploit additional compute to progressively improve solution quality and outperform the evaluated non-learning baselines (Section 5 and Table 1). • We demonstrate that learned priors can be transferred across floorplans: a policy trained jointly on multiple instances provides a transferable search prior that accelerates optimization when fine-tuned on previously unseen floorplans (Figure 5). 

2 Related Work 

Classical methods. Classical physical-design methods rely on optimized combinatorial and continuous optimization procedures. Analytical placement methods such as RePlAce [14] optimize differentiable placement objectives under density constraints, while physical routing commonly relies on Steiner-tree construction [3, 2, 5], shortest-path and maze-routing procedures [6], and iterative rip-up-and-reroute [15, 16, 17]. Application-specific Network-on-Chip (NoC) synthesis similarly considers the joint design of communication architectures for a given application. [18] optimize application-specific network topologies using communication requirements and physical wirelength information, while [19] jointly optimize topology selection, core mapping, and traffic routing through a multi-objective genetic algorithm. More broadly, classical NoC synthesis methods rely on combinatorial optimization and domain-specific heuristics to navigate large design spaces [1]. 

Learning-based methods. Machine learning has been applied to several physical-design problems. AlphaChip [7] formulates macro placement as a sequential decision problem and uses RL to optimize placement quality. Subsequent works have incorporated routing information into learning-based physical-design pipelines. [20] use routing results to evaluate placement quality, while [21] combine RL-based placement with a conditional generative routing model. Other approaches have explored black-box optimization for macro placement [22] and combinations of RL and tree search [23]. Learning has also been applied directly to routing and Steiner-tree construction. [24] formulate physical routing as a sequential RL problem, while REST [8] uses RL to construct rectilinear Steiner minimum trees. For obstacle-aware routing, [9] combine RL with MCTS for Steiner-point selection. Other approaches learn intermediate geometric structures: HubRouter [10] generates hubs that guide pin-hub connections, while NeuralSteiner [11] predicts candidate Steiner points. More recently, OAREST [12] uses RL for obstacle-avoiding rectilinear Steiner minimum tree construction and introduces a restricted representation shown to retain an optimal solution. Our setting differs from these Steiner-tree formulations by optimizing a shared communication infrastructure for multiple communication pairs rather than a tree connecting the pins of a single net. Our formulation jointly optimizes the topology and placement of intermediate switches and the route assigned to each communication pair, allowing communications to share physical infrastructure. It is also related to application-specific NoC synthesis, but focuses on a simplified geometric setting with fixed communicating components and directly constructs the intermediate infrastructure. Within this setting, our hierarchical construction provides a structured search space that preserves feasible assigned routes and contains a globally optimal solution under our model. 

3 Problem Formulation 

Notations. We use calligraphic letters ( e.g., V) for sets, with cardinality |V| . Bold lowercase letters denote vectors ( e.g., 

p). For a point p ∈ R2, we write p = [ x, y ] for its horizontal and vertical coordinates. 

Basic definitions. A directed graph G = ( V, E) consists of a set of vertices V and a set of directed edges E ⊆ V × V .An edge (u, v ) ∈ E is directed from u to v. A directed path from v0 to vk is a sequence of vertices π = ( v0, v 1, . . . , v k)

such that (vj , v j+1 ) ∈ E for all j ∈ { 0, . . . , k − 1}. We denote by E(π) = {(vj , v j+1 ) : 0 ≤ j < k } the set of edges traversed by the directed path π. A path is simple if it contains no repeated vertex, i.e., vj̸ = vℓ for all j̸ = ℓ.2VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

3.1 Problem Setting 

We consider the joint optimization of routing and switch placement for a fixed set of communicating components. Let I

and T denote the sets of initiators and targets, representing the source and destination endpoints of communication requests, respectively, such as processing, memory, or other IP blocks. Their positions are fixed within a rectangular floorplan Ω = [0 , W ] × [0 , H ] ⊂ R2. The communication requirements are specified by a set R ⊆ I × T of communication pairs, i.e., initiator-target pairs for which a communication route must exist. We additionally consider a set of rectangular blockages B ⊂ Ω, whose interiors cannot contain switches or be traversed by wires. Given these inputs, we jointly determine the number and positions of intermediate switches, the routing structure connecting them, and the route assigned to each communication pair. Let S denote the set of switches, with |S| ≤ Smax ,and let pv = [ xv , y v ] ∈ Ω \ B denote the position of each switch v ∈ S . Together with the fixed initiators and targets, these switches define a directed routing graph G = ( V, E), where V = I ∪ T ∪ S . For each communication pair 

(i, t ) ∈ R , the routing solution assigns a simple directed path πi,t = ( v0, . . . , v k), v0 = i, vk = t, that traverses at least one switch, with all intermediate nodes belonging to S. The routing graph is induced by these paths, such that 

E = S 

> (i,t )∈R

E(πi,t ). We make several simplifying assumptions: initiator, target, and switch dimensions and pin-level constraints are ignored, and routing density, congestion, and bandwidth constraints are not modeled. 

3.2 Objective 

We consider rectilinear routing, where wires are composed exclusively of horizontal and vertical segments. For two nodes 

u, v with positions pu and pv , let ΓB(u, v ) denote the set of rectilinear paths between pu and pv that do not intersect the interior of any blockage. We define the obstacle-avoiding rectilinear distance as dB(u, v ) = min γ∈ΓB (u,v ) len( γ).

When an unobstructed Manhattan-shortest path exists, this reduces to dB(u, v ) = |xu − xv | + |yu − yv |.

Both the physical extent of the interconnect and the lengths of individual communication paths are impor-tant considerations in on-chip network design [18, 19]. We therefore distinguish between the total physical wirelength of the routing graph and the route lengths of individual communications. The total wirelength is 

Lwire = P  

> {u,v }: ( u,v )∈E ∨ (v,u )∈E

dB(u, v ), where each physical connection is counted once, regardless of its traversal direction or the number of communication pairs using it. For a route πi,t = (v0 = i, . . . , v k =

t), its length is len( πi,t ) = Pk−1 

> j=0

dB(vj , v j+1 ), and the total route length is Lroute = P 

> (i,t )∈R

len( πi,t ).

The wirelength encourages compact and shared wires, while the route length discourages long communica-tion paths between individual initiator–target pairs. Let Πi,t (S) denote the set of simple directed paths from i to t that traverse at least one switch and whose intermediate vertices belong to S, i.e., Πi,t (S) =

{πi,t = ( v0, . . . , v k) | v0 = i, v k = t, k ≥ 2, v j ∈ S ∀ j ∈ { 1, . . . , k − 1}, v j̸ = vℓ ∀j̸ = ℓ}: the joint routing and switch-placement problem is defined as 

min  

> (S,p,π )∈F

Lwire + λL route , F =

(   S, {pv }v∈S , {πi,t }(i,t )∈R 

 pv ∈ Ω \ B ∀ v ∈ S |S| ≤ Smax ; πi,t ∈ Πi,t (S) ∀(i, t ) ∈ R 

)

. (1) In our experiments, we set λ = 12 . The problem is closely related to the rectilinear Steiner tree problem, which is NP-hard [25]. 

4 Method 

Overview. We formulate joint routing and switch placement as an iterative construction process over a graph represen-tation. Starting from a minimal feasible routing solution containing a single switch, the routing graph is progressively expanded by introducing new switches, placing them on an extended Hanan grid [26], and updating the routes affected by each introduction. Restricting switch placement to this finite set of candidate locations does not exclude a globally optimal solution, but replaces the continuous placement space with a finite one. Each complete refinement step returns a feasible routing configuration, so that search is restricted to valid solutions rather than arbitrary routing graphs. This process is repeated up to a predefined switch budget. We formulate these decisions as a Markov Decision Process and learn a graph policy and value function using Gumbel MCTS [13], with solution quality evaluated according to the objective in Equation (1). Figure 1 summarizes our proposed method. Complete proofs of all propositions are provided in Appendix A. 

4.1 Route-Node Representation 

The routing graph defined in Section 3 specifies the physical connectivity induced by the communication routes. However, an edge may be shared by several communication pairs. Representing these assignments as variable-size edge 3VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Problem instance       

> Blockage
> i1
> i2
> t1
> t2
> Ω,I,T,R,B, S max
> Initial valid route graph G0
> One switch; one path per pair

Hierarchical construction                         

> Phase ϕt: Expand →Place →Refine
> 1. Switch expansion 2. Hanan placement
> Mask invalid locations
> 3. Route refinement
> irbs1rat
> Expand
> s1
> New s2
> rm
> Duplicate s1; add rm
> ρ1, ρ 2, ρ 3, ρ 4
> s1
> s2
> Blockage
> ps1, p s2∈ H H= ( X×Y)\int( B)Keep one ρ⋆;remove edges unique to the others For every route If |S|< S max : next expansion cycle
> ✓Feasible after every complete cycle

Neural-guided action selection       

> Route graph Gt
> + Floorplan Policy–value net
> πθ(· | xt), V θ(xt)Gumbel MCTS Improved policy
> πMCTS
> t→at

Terminal solution              

> Stop when |S|=Smax
> Blockage
> Switch positions pT
> Routes {πi,t }(i,t )∈R
> Terminal return
> r=−(Lwire +λL route
> )
> Replay (xt, π MCTS
> t, r )and update θ

Figure 1: Overview of our routing and switch-placement method. Gumbel MCTS guides repeated switch expansion, Hanan-grid placement, and route refinement while preserving routing feasibility. Inits Switches Targets (1 , 1) (2 , 2) (1 , 1) , (2 , 2) (1 , 1) (2 , 2) 1212

(a) Routing graph with communication pairs stored as edge attributes. Inits Targets 

> 121212
> 1212

(b) Graph after conversion to route nodes. Route nodes labeled (1) correspond to pair (1 , 1) and those labeled (2) 

to pair (2 , 2) .

Figure 2: Route-node conversion. Each communication pair traversing an edge is represented explicitly by a route node. attributes is inconvenient for our construction process. We therefore make individual route assignments explicit in the graph by introducing route nodes .

Definition 4.1 (Route-node conversion) . Let G = ( V, E) be a routing graph induced by a collection of communication routes. For each edge (u, v ) ∈ E , let R(u, v ) = {(i, t ) ∈ R : ( u, v ) ∈ E(πi,t )} denote the communication pairs whose routes traverse that edge. We replace (u, v ) by one two-edge path u → ru,v i,t → v for each (i, t ) ∈ R (u, v ), where ru,v i,t 

is a route node associated with communication pair (i, t ).The resulting representation makes each use of a physical connection by a communication pair explicit. Route assignments can therefore be modified through local graph operations rather than variable-size edge attributes. Figure 2 illustrates the conversion. The transformed graph is bipartite between physical nodes (initiators, targets, and switches) and route nodes. Each route node has exactly one incoming and one outgoing edge and is associated with a single communication pair. Moreover, for every communication pair traversing a switch, an incoming route node is paired with an outgoing route node of the same communication pair. These structural properties are invariants preserved by the construction operations introduced below. 

4.2 Candidate Switch Locations 

Switch positions are initially continuous variables over the floorplan. To obtain a finite placement space, we restrict candidate locations to an extended Hanan grid , a classical construction for rectilinear routing [26]. Let P denote the positions of all initiators and targets, and let CB denote the corners of the rectangular blockages. We define the sets of 4VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Inits Targets         

> 121212
> 1212
> Inits Targets
> 12121212
> 1212
> Inits Targets
> 12121212
> 1212

Figure 4: Switch expansion and route refinement. Expansion of a switch (leftmost yellow node in the first part of the figure) introduces a second switch and exposes four local routing alternatives for each affected communication pair. Route refinement selects one alternative, restoring a unique local route while leaving the remainder of the communication path unchanged. horizontal and vertical coordinates X = {x(p) : p ∈ P} ∪ { x(c) : c ∈ C B}, Y = {y(p) : p ∈ P} ∪ { y(c) : c ∈ C B}.

The set of candidate switch locations is then 

H = {(x, y ) ∈ X × Y : ( x, y ) /∈ int( B)}. (2) Figure 3 illustrates the resulting grid. Blockage   

> 𝑖 1𝑡 1
> 𝑖 2𝑡 2

Figure 3: Extended Hanan grid induced by initiators, targets, and blockage cor-ners. We have the following result : 

Proposition 4.2 (Optimal Switch Placement) . Under rectilinear routing, and for fixed positions of initiators, targets, and blockages, there exists an optimal solution in which every switch is placed at an intersection of the extended Hanan grid H.

Thus, restricting switch placement to H preserves an optimal solution while reducing the continuous placement problem to a finite set of candidate locations. Therefore, in Equation (1), we can replace the search space 

pv ∈ Ω \ B , ∀v ∈ S by pv ∈ H , ∀v ∈ S .

4.3 Switch Expansion and Route Refinement 

In this section, we describe how the routing graph is locally expanded and refined. Given a switch s1, switch expansion introduces a new switch s2 and temporarily introduces routing alternatives associated with s1 and s2. Route refinement subsequently resolves these alternatives independently for each affected communication pair. Those two operations are formally defined as follows. 

Definition 4.3 (Switch expansion) . Let s1 be the switch selected for expan-sion, and let Nb(s1) and Na(s1) denote the sets of route nodes immediately preceding and following s1, respectively. Switch expansion introduces a new switch s2. For every rb ∈ N b(s1), we add the edge rb → s2, and for every ra ∈ N a(s1), we add the edge s2 → ra.For each communication pair (i, t ) traversing s1, we additionally introduce a route node ri,t m associated with (i, t ) and add the edges s1 → ri,t m → s2, s 2 → ri,t m → s1.

Remark 4.4 . Informally, the expansion duplicates the selected switch and introduces, for each affected communication pair, an additional route node between the two switches. If rb and ra denote the route nodes immediately before and after the expanded switch, this exposes four local routing alternatives: 

ρ1 : rb → s1 → ra, ρ2 : rb → s2 → ra,ρ3 : rb → s1 → rm → s2 → ra, ρ4 : rb → s2 → rm → s1 → ra.

Route refinement subsequently selects one of these four alternatives. 

Definition 4.5 (Route refinement) . For each communication pair affected by the expansion, let {ρ1, ρ 2, ρ 3, ρ 4} denote its four local routing alternatives, where each ρj is identified with its set of edges. Given a selected alternative ρ⋆, route refinement removes all edges belonging exclusively to the unselected alternatives: E ← E \ 

S  

> ρj̸=ρ⋆

E(ρj ) \ E(ρ⋆)



.

Route nodes left disconnected by this operation are removed. Figure 4 illustrates the expansion and subsequent refinement process. Although the expanded intermediate graph contains multiple alternatives for the affected communication pairs, refinement restores a feasible routing configuration. 5VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

Proposition 4.6 (Validity preservation) . Assume the routing configuration before expansion assigns exactly one simple directed path to every communication pair. After applying switch expansion and route refinement (Definitions 4.3 and 4.5), the resulting routing configuration again assigns exactly one simple directed path to every communication pair. 

This proposition states that the feasibility of the constructed routing is an invariant of the expansion–refinement cycle, 

i.e., starting from a minimal feasible routing with a single switch, any routing constructed using those two operations remains feasible. However, the hierarchical construction cannot generate every feasible routing configuration. Indeed, consider the following example: 

Example 4.7 . Consider three switches s1, s 2, s 3 and three communication routes π1 = ( s1, s 2, s 3), π2 = ( s2, s 3, s 1),

π3 = ( s3, s 1, s 2). This configuration cannot be generated by the hierarchical construction following Definitions 4.3 and 4.5. Indeed, consider the switch introduced last and assume, without loss of generality, that it is s3. This switch must be introduced by expanding either s1 or s2. For any route containing both the parent switch and s3, these two switches are consecutive immediately after the expansion. Since s3 is introduced last, no subsequent expansion can insert another switch between them. If s3 is introduced by expanding s1, this contradicts π1 = ( s1, s 2, s 3). If it is introduced by expanding s2, this contradicts π3 = ( s3, s 1, s 2). Hence the configuration cannot be generated by the hierarchical construction. Nevertheless, the following result shows that excluding such configurations does not sacrifice global optimality: at least one globally optimal solution always belongs to the hierarchical search space. 

Proposition 4.8 (Optimality of the hierarchical search space) . There exists a globally optimal solution to Equation (1) 

that can be obtained from the initial configuration through a finite sequence of switch expansions, placements, and route refinements. 

4.4 Routing as a Sequential Markov Decision Process 

We formulate the hierarchical construction process as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (X , A, P, R). An episode starts from a single switch connecting every communication pair and progressively refines an initially feasible routing configuration through successive switch expansions, switch placements, and route refinements. 

State space. At step t, the state is defined as xt =



Gt, pt, ϕ t, Qplace  

> t

, Qroute 

> t



, where Gt = ( Vt, Et) is the current route-node graph, pt = {pv }v∈S t contains the positions of the current switches, and ϕt denotes the current decision phase. The queues Qplace  

> t

and Qroute  

> t

contain, respectively, the switches awaiting placement and the communication routes awaiting refinement. The next placement or refinement decision always operates on the first element of the corresponding queue. 

Initial state. The initial graph G0 contains a single switch s(0) . For every communication pair (i, t ) ∈ R , two route nodes rin  

> i,t

and rout  

> i,t

form the path i → rin  

> i,t

→ s(0) → rout  

> i,t

→ t. The initial switch is placed at a fixed valid location 

ps(0) ∈ H . Both queues are initially empty, Qplace 0 = Qroute 0 = ∅, and the initial phase corresponds to switch expansion. The initial state therefore represents a feasible routing solution. 

Action space. The set of admissible actions depends on the current phase ϕt. During switch expansion, the action selects a switch s ∈ S t to expand according to Definition 4.3. During switch placement, the action selects a valid candidate location p ∈ H for the first switch in Qplace  

> t

. During route refinement, the action selects one of the four local routing alternatives ρ⋆ ∈ { ρ1, ρ 2, ρ 3, ρ 4} for the first route in Qroute  

> t

.

Transition dynamics. The environment is deterministic and Markovian. Each construction cycle begins with an expansion action, which introduces a new switch that initially inherits the position of the expanded switch. The two switches affected by the expansion are added to Qplace  

> t

, and the affected communication routes are added to Qroute  

> t

.The placement and refinement queues are then processed sequentially. Each action operates on and removes the first element of the corresponding queue. Once Qplace  

> t

is empty, the process transitions from placement to route refinement. Once Qroute  

> t

is also empty, the resulting graph again represents a feasible routing configuration and the process returns to the switch expansion phase. The episode terminates when the switch budget Smax is reached and the final refinement cycle has been completed. 

Reward. We use a sparse terminal reward corresponding to the negative routing objective of Equation (1): rt = 0 for all t < T , and rT = −Lwire (GT ) − λL route (GT ), where λ = 12 in our experiments. 6VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

5 Implementation 

We learn a shared graph policy and value network over the sequential decision process defined in Section 4.4. The network jointly encodes the current routing graph, blockage geometry, and candidate switch locations with separate policy heads for switch expansion, placement, and route refinement. Invalid actions are masked throughout construction. We use Gumbel MCTS [13] to explore the resulting search space, using the learned policy and value function to guide tree search and training them toward search-improved targets. Following the risk-seeking value estimation of AlphaTensor [27], we train the value function toward the top 25% of observed returns rather than their average. Per-floorplan PopArt [28] is used for value normalization. To isolate the contribution of tree search, we additionally train PPO-EWMA [29] on the same hierarchical MDP. PPO-EWMA uses the same policy-value architecture, action masking, terminal objective, and PopArt value normalization, but selects actions directly from the learned policy without tree search. Architectural details, optimization procedures, and hyperparameters are provided in Appendix C. 

6 Experiments and Results 

Our experiments investigate whether ( i) learned guidance improves over non-learning optimization methods, ( ii ) explicit tree search improves over direct policy optimization, and ( iii ) pretraining across floorplans improves optimization on unseen instances. Experimental details, numerical results, and routing visualizations are provided in Appendices C, D, and E, respectively. 

6.1 Datasets and Experimental Setup Floorplans. We evaluate our model on 28 synthetic square floorplans with rectangular blockages and initiator–target communication constraints. We use 24 floorplans for pretraining and hold out the remaining four for transfer experiments. The instances contain 18–25 communication pairs, 3–5 initiators, and 5–8 targets, with switch budgets ranging from 2 to 5. The unobstructed area covers 58.4%–81.3% of each floorplan. We construct an extended Hanan grid from terminal coordinates and blockage boundaries, yielding grids ranging from 24 × 23 to 42 × 44 candidate positions. 

Metric. We evaluate solutions using the objective defined in Section 3, i.e., Lwire + 12 Lroute . Wirelength counts each physical connection once, irrespective of the number or direction of routes using it, while route length counts every route traversal. For readability, all lengths are normalized by the side length of the corresponding floorplan. 

Baselines. We compare Gumbel MCTS [13] against classical, model-free search, and direct policy optimization baselines. Heuristic is a deterministic obstacle-aware, Steiner-inspired constructive method that greedily selects switch locations from the extended Hanan grid and sequentially routes communication pairs using their marginal contribution to the objective. Random Search [30] uniformly samples legal actions within our hierarchical framework, isolating the benefit of learned guidance. Genetic Algorithm [31] evolves complete hierarchical action sequences using selection, crossover, mutation, and random immigration, providing a stronger non-learning search baseline. Finally, 

PPO-EWMA [29] uses the same policy-value architecture and hierarchical environment as Gumbel MCTS, but acts directly from the learned policy without tree search, isolating the contribution of explicit search. All methods except Heuristic are run for 48 hours on the 24 pretraining floorplans. Heuristic is instead run once as a deterministic constructive procedure. Fine-tuning is performed for 24 hours, with transfer results aggregated over three independent runs. For both PPO-EWMA and Gumbel MCTS, we compare fine-tuning from the respective pretrained checkpoint against training from scratch on each of the four held-out floorplans. 

6.2 Results and Discussion Comparison with optimization baselines. Table 1 reports the objective obtained on the 24 training floorplans. The Heuristic achieves strong results on several instances, but its performance is highly instance-dependent. Random Search performs poorly throughout. This shows the need for effective guidance within the hierarchical search space. The Genetic Algorithm is considerably stronger and competitive on several instances, but struggles on more challenging floorplans, such as 18 and 19. PPO-EWMA improves upon these baselines on most instances, and shows the benefit of learned guidance, but still exhibits substantial performance gaps on some instances. Gumbel MCTS achieves the strongest and most consistent performance, including on instances where the other methods struggle. This is particularly evident on floorplans 18 and 19, where it obtains objectives of 13 .601 and 14 .373 , compared with 19 .147 and 18 .488 

for PPO-EWMA and 19 .881 and 22 .062 for the Genetic Algorithm. Among all methods, Gumbel MCTS benefits the most from additional compute, continuing to improve as the search budget increases. 7VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Table 1: Objective values on the 24 training floorplans (lower is better). Best results are shown in bold and second-best results are underlined. 

Method 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

Heuristic 11.902 11.255 15.349 11.330 14.847 11.126 8.090 10.301 11.292 14.615 14.741 13.418 Random search 18.706 20.799 24.042 17.420 23.629 19.310 12.672 18.574 18.663 24.931 22.584 20.775 Genetic algorithm 14.382 13.999 16.854 12.622 17.970 13.107 8.224 11.954 14.152 15.799 16.478 16.504 PPO-EWMA 12.166 11.484 15.670 11.576 14.717 10.960 8.595 10.352 11.142 13.329 14.151 13.361 

Gumbel MCTS 11.333 10.880 14.274 9.784 13.926 9.918 7.739 9.897 10.820 13.028 13.995 13.361 Method 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 

Heuristic 13.662 15.003 14.512 15.284 16.571 16.366 16.277 16.277 14.909 15.415 14.007 15.684 Random search 21.425 21.875 19.338 20.146 20.943 30.810 29.030 20.421 23.683 21.337 22.457 20.583 Genetic algorithm 15.238 15.057 14.134 15.236 15.239 19.881 22.062 15.726 16.580 14.531 14.621 15.277 

PPO-EWMA 13.287 13.593 14.134 15.269 15.239 19.147 18.488 15.817 13.095 13.989 12.409 15.277 

Gumbel MCTS 13.287 13.466 14.134 15.236 15.239 13.601 14.373 15.726 12.779 13.471 12.386 15.277 0 1

> Wall time (hours)
> 15.8 16.0 16.4 17.2 19.1 23.3
> Best objective

(a) Fine-tuning instance 1 0 1 2 3 

> Wall time (hours)
> 13.9 14.3 15.0 16.7 20.3 28.2
> Best objective

(b) Fine-tuning instance 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 

> Wall time (hours)
> 13.3 13.8 14.9 17.2 22.3 33.4
> Best objective

(c) Fine-tuning instance 3 0 2 4 6 8 10 12  

> Wall time (hours)
> 14.2 14.8 16.0 18.6 24.4 37.2
> Best objective

(d) Fine-tuning instance 4 

Figure 5: Comparison between optimization from scratch and fine-tuning from a policy pretrained on the 24 training floorplans, evaluated on held-out floorplans. Each curve shows the mean over three independent runs, and the shaded region indicates one standard deviation. The objective is shown on a logarithmic scale. For readability, the time axis is truncated once all methods are within 1% of their respective best objective values. PPO-EWMA is shown in orange and Gumbel MCTS in blue. Solid lines correspond to fine-tuning from the pretrained policy, while dotted lines correspond to optimization from scratch. 

Transfer to unseen floorplans. We next investigate whether training across multiple floorplans produces reusable policies that facilitate optimization of previously unseen instances. We pretrain on the 24 training floorplans and evaluate transfer on four held-out floorplans. For each target instance, we compare fine-tuning from the fixed pretrained checkpoint against training the same model from random initialization. Results are aggregated over three independent fine-tuning runs. Figure 5 shows that pretraining substantially accelerates optimization on held-out floorplans. Fine-tuning starts from stronger solutions than training from scratch and reaches competitive solutions using less target-instance optimization. On some instances, fine-tuning also reaches better solutions within the available optimization budget. 8VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

6.3 Limitations 

Our formulation deliberately omits several aspects of physical design. The current environment does not model component dimensions, pin-level constraints, unit density, routing congestion, or bandwidth constraints, and the optimization objective considers only physical wirelength and communication-route length. Similarly, our experiments are limited to relatively small routing instances compared with real-world NoC designs, which can contain up to tens of thousands of communication connections. While the formulation does not assume fixed instance sizes, larger instances increase the computational cost. Extending the formulation to richer physical constraints and objectives, and evaluating it at industrial scale, are left to future work. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduced a learning-based framework for joint routing and switch placement based on a validity-preserving graph hierarchical formulation. The formulation restricts switch locations to an extended Hanan grid and enforces feasibility at every complete expansion-refinement cycle. Together, these choices discretize the placement space and restrict search to feasible solutions, substantially reducing the difficulty of the search. Experiments across diverse floorplans show that Gumbel MCTS effectively explores the resulting search space, consistently outperforming classical optimization baselines and direct policy optimization, with particularly large improvements on more challenging instances. Pretraining across multiple floorplans also provides a useful initialization for unseen instances, reducing the time required to find high-quality solutions. 

Reproducibility Statement 

All proofs are given in Appendix A. Appendices B and C provide all the details for the implementation and experiments. The code will be made public upon acceptance of the paper. 

AI Use Statement 

Generative AI was used to assist with literature review, polishing the writing, and coding. It was also used to double-check and refine the proofs in Appendix A. In particular, it provided a counterexample to an initial version of Proposition 4.8, which prompted us to refine the proposition statement. We take responsibility for the final content of this work, including all text, claims, code, and other materials produced with the assistance of generative AI. 

References 

[1] Radu Marculescu, Umit Y Ogras, Li-Shiuan Peh, Natalie Enright Jerger, and Yatin Hoskote. Outstanding research problems in noc design: system, microarchitecture, and circuit perspectives. IEEE Transactions on computer-aided design of integrated circuits and systems , 2008. [2] Jiang Hu and Sachin S. Sapatnekar. A survey on multi-net global routing for integrated circuits. Integration , 2001. [3] Hao Tang, Genggeng Liu, Xiaohua Chen, and Naixue Xiong. A survey on steiner tree construction and global routing for vlsi design. IEEE Access , 2020. [4] Edmund Ihler, Gabriele Reich, and Peter Widmayer. Class steiner trees and vlsi-design. Discrete Applied Mathematics , 1999. [5] Chris Chu and Yiu-Chung Wong. Fast and accurate rectilinear steiner minimal tree algorithm for vlsi design. In 

International Symposium on Physical Design , 2005. [6] C. Y. Lee. An algorithm for path connections and its applications. IRE Transactions on Electronic Computers ,1961. [7] Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Wenjie Jiang, Ebrahim Songhori, Shen Wang, Young-Joon Lee, Eric Johnson, Omkar Pathak, Azade Nova, et al. A graph placement methodology for fast chip design. 

Nature , 2021. [8] Jinwei Liu, Gengjie Chen, and Evangeline FY Young. Rest: Constructing rectilinear steiner minimum tree via reinforcement learning. In ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference , 2021. 9VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA [9] Po-Yan Chen, Bing-Ting Ke, Tai-Cheng Lee, I-Ching Tsai, Tai-Wei Kung, Li-Yi Lin, En-Cheng Liu, Yun-Chih Chang, Yih-Lang Li, and Mango C-T Chao. A reinforcement learning agent for obstacle-avoiding rectilinear steiner tree construction. In International Symposium on Physical Design , 2022. [10] Xingbo Du, Chonghua Wang, Ruizhe Zhong, and Junchi Yan. Hubrouter: Learning global routing via hub generation and pin-hub connection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [11] Ruizhi Liu, Zhisheng Zeng, Shizhe Ding, Jingyan Sui, Xingquan Li, and Dongbo Bu. Neuralsteiner: Learning steiner tree for overflow-avoiding global routing in chip design. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [12] Xingbo Du, Ruizhe Zhong, and Junchi Yan. Train on pins and test on obstacles for rectilinear steiner minimum tree. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. [13] Ivo Danihelka, Arthur Guez, Julian Schrittwieser, and David Silver. Policy improvement by planning with gumbel. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [14] Chung-Kuan Cheng, Andrew B Kahng, Ilgweon Kang, and Lutong Wang. Replace: Advancing solution quality and routability validation in global placement. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2018. [15] W.A. Dees and R.J. Smith. Performance of interconnection rip-up and reroute strategies. In Design Automation Conference , 1981. [16] Ralph Linsker. An iterative-improvement penalty-function-driven wire routing system. IBM Journal of Research and Development , 1984. [17] Andrew B. Kahng, Lutong Wang, and Bangqi Xu. Tritonroute: The open-source detailed router. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 2021. [18] Tapani Ahonen, David A Sigüenza-Tortosa, Hong Bin, and Jari Nurmi. Topology optimization for application-specific networks-on-chip. In International Workshop on System Level Interconnect Prediction , 2004. [19] Ahmed A Morgan, Haytham Elmiligi, Mohamed Watheq El-Kharashi, and Fayez Gebali. Unified multi-objective mapping and architecture customisation of networks-on-chip. IET Computers & Digital Techniques , 2013. [20] Ruoyu Cheng and Junchi Yan. On joint learning for solving placement and routing in chip design. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. [21] Ruoyu Cheng, Xianglong Lyu, Yang Li, Junjie Ye, Jianye Hao, and Junchi Yan. The policy-gradient placement and generative routing neural networks for chip design. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,2022. [22] Yunqi Shi, Ke Xue, Song Lei, and Chao Qian. Macro placement by wire-mask-guided black-box optimization. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [23] Zijie Geng, Jie Wang, Ziyan Liu, Siyuan Xu, Zhentao Tang, Mingxuan Yuan, Jianye Hao, Yongdong Zhang, and Feng Wu. Reinforcement learning within tree search for fast macro placement. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [24] Haiguang Liao, Wentai Zhang, Xuliang Dong, Barnabas Poczos, Kenji Shimada, and Levent Burak Kara. A deep reinforcement learning approach for global routing. Journal of Mechanical Design , 2020. [25] Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson. The rectilinear steiner tree problem is np-complete. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics , 1977. [26] Maurice Hanan. On steiner’s problem with rectilinear distance. SIAM Journal on Applied mathematics , 1966. [27] Alhussein Fawzi, Matej Balog, Aja Huang, Thomas Hubert, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Francisco J R. Ruiz, Julian Schrittwieser, Grzegorz Swirszcz, et al. Discovering faster matrix multiplication algorithms with reinforcement learning. Nature , 2022. [28] Matteo Hessel, Hubert Soyer, Lasse Espeholt, Wojciech Czarnecki, Simon Schmitt, and Hado Van Hasselt. Multi-task deep reinforcement learning with popart. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2019. [29] Jacob Hilton, Karl Cobbe, and John Schulman. Batch size-invariance for policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. [30] Dean C Karnopp. Random search techniques for optimization problems. Automatica , 1963. [31] John H Holland. Genetic algorithms. Scientific american , 1992. [32] Guillaume MJ-B Chaslot, Mark HM Winands, and H Jaap van Den Herik. Parallel monte-carlo tree search. In 

International Conference on Computers and Games , 2008. 10 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

## Appendix Table of Contents 

A Proofs 12 

A.1 Optimality on the Hanan Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 A.2 Correct and Static Routing at Every Step of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 A.3 Optimality of the Hierarchical Search Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 

B Implementation Details 14 

B.1 Model Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 B.2 PPO-EWMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 B.3 Gumbel MCTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

C Experimental Details 16 

C.1 Datasets and Transfer Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 C.2 Optimization Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 C.3 Compute and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 

D Detailed Numerical Results 18 

D.1 Pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 D.2 Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

E Floorplans Generated by the Different Methods 22 

E.1 Pretraining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 E.2 Fine-Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 

11 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

A Proofs 

In this section, we provide proofs for all the propositions in the main paper. 

A.1 Optimality on the Hanan Grid Proposition A.1 (Optimal Switch Placement) . Under rectilinear routing, and for fixed positions of initiators, targets, and blockages, there exists an optimal solution in which every switch is placed at an intersection of the extended Hanan grid H.Proof. We first establish a geometric property used in the argument. Recall that blockage interiors are forbidden, while their boundaries are admissible. 

Lemma A.2. Let C be the set of switches sharing an off-grid x-coordinate x, and let x− < x < x + be consecutive coordinates obtained by augmenting the vertical Hanan lines with all switch x-coordinates. Every physical connection incident to C admits a shortest realization whose length varies affinely when C is translated horizontally within 

[x−, x +].Proof. Since x− and x+ are consecutive augmented coordinates, no vertical blockage boundary lies in the open slab 

(x−, x +) × R. Consequently, from any feasible point (x, y ) in the slab, the horizontal segment to either boundary is feasible: otherwise a rectangular blockage would have a vertical boundary inside the slab or would contain (x, y ).Consider first a shortest connection from s = ( x, y s) ∈ C to an endpoint outside C. The other endpoint cannot lie strictly inside the slab, since terminal coordinates are Hanan coordinates and all switch coordinates were included in the augmentation. Hence the connection reaches one of the slab boundaries; suppose it first reaches x+ at b = ( x+, y b).The prefix from s to b can be replaced by a horizontal segment from (x, y s) to (x+, y s) followed by a vertical segment along x+ to b. This path is feasible and has length x+ − x + |yb − ys|, the rectilinear lower bound between s and b. It is therefore also shortest. After translating s by δ, only its initial horizontal segment changes, so the connection length changes by −δ. A connection reaching x− analogously changes by +δ.Now consider a connection whose two endpoints belong to C. If their vertical segment is feasible, it remains feasible under a common translation within the slab and its length is constant. Otherwise, any feasible connection between them must leave the slab. Applying the preceding argument at both endpoints gives a shortest realization with fixed boundary attachments. Its length therefore changes by −2δ, 2δ, or 0, according to the boundaries through which it leaves and re-enters the slab. Thus every connection incident to C has a shortest realization whose length is affine in δ.We now consider a globally optimal solution with objective J⋆ and fix its logical routing topology. For each physical connection {u, v }, let muv be the number of communication routes traversing it. Its contribution to the objective has fixed positive weight wuv = 1 + λm uv . Hence, for the fixed topology, the optimal objective can be written as 

J⋆ = P 

> {u,v }∈ E

wuv dB(u, v ), where dB(u, v ) denotes the shortest obstacle-avoiding rectilinear distance between u

and v.We first align the x-coordinates. Let X be the set of vertical Hanan coordinates and define bX = X ∪ { xs : s ∈ S} .Group switches sharing the same x / ∈ X , and let Nx be the number of such off-grid groups. Consider one group C at x, with adjacent coordinates x− < x < x + in bX . Choose for each incident connection a shortest realization given by Lemma A.2. If C is translated by δ, with x + δ ∈ [x−, x +], the weighted length of these realizations is affine: eJ(δ) = J(0) + aδ for some constant a. Since δ = 0 lies between the two boundary displacements, at least one boundary satisfies eJ(δ) ≤ J(0) .Move C to such a boundary. The constructed paths certify a feasible solution with no larger objective; replacing them by shortest paths at the new switch positions can only improve it further. If the reached coordinate is in X , C is now Hanan-aligned; otherwise it merges with another switch group. In either case, Nx strictly decreases. Repeating this operation therefore places every switch on a vertical Hanan line after finitely many moves, without increasing the objective. Applying the same argument to the y-coordinates, while keeping the x-coordinates fixed, places every switch at an intersection of H without increasing the objective. The paths maintained during these translations are feasible, but need not be shortest at the final switch positions. We therefore replace each physical connection by a shortest 12 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA obstacle-avoiding rectilinear path between its final endpoints. Such a path exists because the maintained path provides a feasible connection, and this replacement can only decrease the objective. Thus, starting from the globally optimal value J⋆, we obtain a feasible grid-aligned solution with objective at most J⋆. By global optimality, its objective must equal J⋆, completing the proof. 

A.2 Correct and Static Routing at Every Step of the Algorithm Proposition A.3 (Validity preservation) . Assume the routing configuration before expansion assigns exactly one simple directed path to every communication pair. After applying switch expansion and route refinement (Definitions 4.3 and 4.5), the resulting routing configuration again assigns exactly one simple directed path to every communication pair. Proof. Let G = ( V, E) be a valid routing configuration and let s1 be the switch selected for expansion. Consider a communication pair (i, t ) ∈ R .If πi,t does not traverse s1, neither switch expansion nor route refinement modifies its route, so πi,t remains a unique simple directed path. Now suppose that πi,t traverses s1. Because πi,t is simple, it visits s1 exactly once. Let rb and ra denote the route nodes immediately preceding and following s1 on πi,t . Switch expansion leaves the remainder of πi,t unchanged and replaces the local segment rb → s1 → ra by the four alternatives ρ1 : rb → s1 → ra, ρ2 : rb → s2 → ra,

ρ3 : rb → s1 → rm → s2 → ra and ρ4 : rb → s2 → rm → s1 → ra, where s2 is the newly introduced switch and rm

is the corresponding route node for (i, t ).Each ρj is a simple directed path from rb to ra. Indeed, s2 and rm are newly introduced nodes, while s1 occurs only once in each alternative. Route refinement selects exactly one ρj and removes the edges belonging exclusively to the remaining alternatives. Replacing the original local segment by the selected ρj therefore yields exactly one simple directed path from i to t.Since this argument applies independently to every communication pair affected by the expansion, while all unaffected routes remain unchanged, the refined configuration assigns exactly one simple directed path to every communication pair. 

A.3 Optimality of the Hierarchical Search Space Proposition A.4 (Optimality of the hierarchical search space) . There exists a globally optimal solution to Equation (1) 

that can be obtained from the initial configuration through a finite sequence of switch expansions, placements, and route refinements. Proof. We first establish a structural property of optimal routing solutions. For a communication route π containing two switches sa and sb, let π[sa, s b] denote the physical subpath between them, independently of its traversal direction. 

Lemma A.5 (Common-subpath property) . There exists a globally optimal routing configuration such that, for any pair of switches sa and sb, all communication routes containing both switches use the same switch sequence between them, possibly in reverse order. Proof. Index the switches up to the budget Smax , and assign every possible undirected connection e between terminals and switches a positive tie-breaking weight ωe = 2 k(e), where the exponents k(e) are distinct. For a route π =(v0, . . . , v k), define τ (π) = Pkj=1 ω{vj−1,v j }. Since routes are simple, two distinct paths between the same endpoints, up to reversal, have different values of τ .Among all globally optimal routing configurations, choose one minimizing Ψ = P 

> (i,t )∈R

τ (πi,t ). Such a configuration exists because the switch budget and the number of communication pairs are finite, and hence only finitely many simple route sequences are possible. Suppose, for contradiction, that two communication routes contain the same switches sa and sb but use different switch sequences P1 and P2 between them. Orient both sequences from sa to sb, and let L(P ) denote their route-length contribution. Without loss of generality, assume that L(P1) < L (P2), or that L(P1) = L(P2) and τ (P1) < τ (P2).Replace P2 in its route by P1, using the reverse of P1 if necessary. Every connection of P1 is already present in the routing configuration, so this introduces no new physical wire. If the resulting route contains a repeated switch, erase the resulting loops; this preserves connectivity and can only remove physical wire and route length. 13 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA If L(P1) < L (P2), the route-length term strictly decreases while wirelength does not increase, contradicting global optimality. Otherwise, the objective does not increase and therefore, by global optimality, remains unchanged. The resulting configuration is thus also globally optimal, but replacing P2 by P1 strictly decreases Ψ. Any loop removal only decreases it further because all ωe are positive. This contradicts the choice of the globally optimal configuration minimizing Ψ.Therefore no such pair of routes can exist, proving the claim. Now let G⋆ be such a globally optimal configuration. By Proposition 4.2, we may additionally choose G⋆ such that every switch is placed on the extended Hanan grid H.We now construct a finite sequence of contractions G⋆ = G(m) Cm

−−→ G(m−1) Cm−1

−−−−→ · · · C1

−−→ G(0) , where G(0) 

contains a single switch. Consider a configuration G(k) containing at least two switches. If some communication route contains at least two switches, choose two switches sa and sb that are consecutive on that route. Their physical subpath is the single connection between sa and sb; hence, by Lemma A.5, every other communication route containing both switches also contains them consecutively, possibly in the opposite order. If no communication route contains two switches, choose any two remaining switches sa and sb, which cannot occur together on any communication route. For every communication pair whose route contains at least one of sa and sb, the local subpath involving these switches is therefore one of → sa →, → sb →, → sa → sb →, → sb → sa → . Before contracting the switches, we record this local subpath for each such communication pair. The contraction Ck identifies sa and sb with a single macro-switch s and replaces each of these local subpaths by 

→ s → . All other communication routes are left unchanged. Each contraction removes one switch. Repeating this construction therefore yields, after finitely many steps, a single-switch configuration G(0) .We now reverse the sequence constructively. For each contraction Ck, we recorded the two switches (sa, s b), their positions in G⋆, and the local subpath of every communication route affected by the contraction. Starting from G(k−1) ,we expand the corresponding macro-switch s into sa and sb and assign them their positions p⋆sa , p⋆sb ∈ H . For each communication pair traversing s, route refinement replaces → s → by its recorded local subpath, → sa →, →

sb →, → sa → sb →, or → sb → sa → . All other communication routes are unaffected. Thus, the expansion, placement, and refinement operations reconstruct G(k) exactly from G(k−1) .Reversing all contractions consequently gives G(0) −→ G(1) −→ · · · −→ G(m) = G⋆, where every transition consists of one switch expansion, the corresponding switch placements, and the recorded route refinements. Hence G⋆ can be constructed from the initial configuration through a finite sequence of switch expansions, placements, and route refinements. Since G⋆ is globally optimal, the hierarchical search space contains a globally optimal solution. 

B Implementation Details 

B.1 Model Architecture 

The policy and value functions share a neural architecture that jointly encodes the current routing configuration and physical floorplan. The routing configuration is represented as an augmented directed graph containing initiators, targets, instantiated switches, and route-bundle nodes representing physical segments shared by one or more communication routes. The floorplan is represented by a raster encoding of the blockage geometry and legal candidate switch locations. The architecture is structured as follows: 1. Routing graph representation: Graph nodes represent initiators, targets, switches, and route bundles. Node and edge attributes encode node type, normalized coordinates, communication identities, active switches, geometric distances, and the current routing configuration. 2. Graph feature embedding: Coordinate and categorical attributes are independently embedded into 24 -dimensional representations and combined to initialize the graph features used by the policy and value networks. 3. Floorplan encoding: The physical floorplan is represented by a two-channel 128 × 128 image. The first channel encodes blockage occupancy, while the second identifies legal candidate switch locations. A convolutional encoder consisting of four blocks with GroupNorm and ReLU activations produces spatial and global floorplan representa-tions. These representations condition both the routing-graph features and the switch-placement predictions. 14 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 4. Graph processing: The routing graph is processed by four directed message-passing layers with hidden dimension 

80 . This produces contextual node representations that combine the current routing structure with the encoded physical environment. 5. Policy prediction: Separate policy heads parameterize the three action types of the hierarchical MDP: switch expansion, switch placement, and route refinement. For expansion, the policy predicts a scalar score for each existing switch, normalized across the switches in the current graph. For placement, it predicts a two-dimensional score map over candidate locations for each switch being placed. Invalid and absent locations are masked, and each placement map is normalized independently. For refinement, the policy predicts four scores for each relevant graph edge, corresponding to the four refinement alternatives defined in Sec. 4. Predictions associated with edges belonging to the same affected communication route are averaged to obtain its four refinement scores. 6. Value prediction: The contextual node representations are aggregated using attention pooling with four learned queries and passed through a value network with two hidden layers of dimension 160 . For PPO-EWMA, the network predicts a scalar state value. For Gumbel MCTS, following AlphaTensor [27], it predicts eight return quantiles, with the mean of the two largest quantiles used as the leaf value during search. The quantile outputs are trained using the quantile Huber loss at levels τi = ( i − 12 )/8.We use PopArt normalization with separate statistics for each floorplan. Statistics are updated once per fresh trajectory collection using a decay of 0.9 and a minimum standard deviation of 10 −6. Following each update, the output-layer parameters are rescaled so that the corresponding unnormalized value predictions remain unchanged. The complete policy and value architecture contains approximately 0.7 million trainable parameters. Both learning methods use AdamW with learning rate 10 −4 and zero weight decay, per-GPU optimization batches of 4096 , and gradient-norm clipping at 1.

B.2 PPO-EWMA 

We train PPO using an exponentially weighted moving-average proximal policy [29]. Complete trajectories are collected under the current behavior policy and optimized using a clipped importance-sampling objective relative to the exponentially averaged proximal policy. We use undiscounted Monte Carlo returns with γ = 1 .We use one optimization epoch per rollout, a value-loss coefficient of 0.5, an entropy coefficient of 0.05 , a clipping coefficient of 0.01 , a proximal-policy EWMA decay of 0.889 , and a maximum importance ratio of 100 . Advantages are normalized separately for each floorplan using exponentially weighted running moments with decay 0.9. We collect 

8192 trajectories per GPU per collection. 

B.3 Gumbel MCTS 

We implement Gumbel MCTS following Gumbel AlphaZero [13]. At each decision state, the policy network provides action priors and the value network predicts eight return quantiles. The mean of the largest two predicted quantiles, corresponding to the upper quartile of the predicted return distribution, is used as the scalar leaf value during search. At the root, actions are selected using Gumbel-perturbed policy logits and evaluated through sequential halving. At non-root states, simulations are allocated according to the completed-value policy-improvement rule. During training, we use 800 MCTS simulations per decision and collect 512 trajectories per floorplan per collection. At most 128 root actions are retained for sequential halving. We use unit-scale Gumbel perturbations, cvisit = 50 , and 

cscale = 0 .01 .Search simulations are evaluated asynchronously. Within each root-action subtree, the number of concurrent simulations is limited to 0.08 of the simulation budget. A virtual loss [32] of 0.1, expressed in normalized completed-Q units, is applied to in-flight branches to reduce collisions between concurrent simulations. To stabilize learning from search-improved targets, we interpolate the policy target with the current policy using 

ηπ = 0 .25 : πtarget = (1 − ηπ )πprior + ηπ πsearch .

For the quantile critic, let zprior = ( z1, . . . , z 8) denote the predicted return quantiles and let G denote the realized return. At collection k, each quantile target is 

zi, target = (1 − η(k) 

> V

)zi, prior + η(k) 

> V

G, η(k) 

> V

= max 



0.25 , 1

k



. (3) The larger interpolation coefficient during the initial collections mitigates critic cold start; afterward, it matches the policy interpolation coefficient. 15 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA MCTS samples are retained for two collections, corresponding to an expected 20 optimization replays per sample. The value-loss coefficient is 0.5.

C Experimental Details 

This section provides additional details on the datasets, baselines, training setup, computational resources, and evaluation protocols used in our experiments. Unless otherwise stated, all methods are evaluated using the same routing objective and feasibility requirements. Random Search and the Genetic Algorithm operate directly in the same hierarchical routing environment as the learning-based methods. The Heuristic uses the same extended Hanan grid. PPO-EWMA and Gumbel MCTS share the same routing environment and neural backbone, with scalar and quantile value heads, respectively. 

C.1 Datasets and Transfer Protocol 

Our pretraining dataset contains 24 synthetically generated routing floorplans. Each instance contains between 6 and 18 

rectangular blockages, 3–5 initiators, 5–8 targets, and 18 –25 required directed communications. The switch budget ranges from 2 to 5. All floorplans are square. For each learning algorithm, a single shared model is trained across all pretraining floorplans, with trajectories distributed approximately uniformly across instances during data collection. For transfer experiments, we use four target floorplans held out from pretraining, covering two-, three-, and four-switch routing settings. For each target instance, we compare initialization from the corresponding pretrained model against training from scratch. When transferring a pretrained model, we retain all shape-compatible shared parameters, including the floorplan encoder, message-passing layers, policy heads, attention pooling, and hidden value-network layers. The initiator-, target-, and route-identifier embeddings and the floorplan-specific PopArt output layer are reinitialized. Optimizer state, replay data, PopArt statistics, and algorithm-specific training state are not transferred. 

C.2 Optimization Baselines Heuristic. The Heuristic is a deterministic obstacle-aware, Steiner-inspired constructive method operating on the extended Hanan grid. Every communication route is required to traverse at least one switch. Candidate locations are ranked by evaluating single-switch routing solutions, and the best 128 candidates are retained. The method evaluates the retained one-switch solutions and greedily expands the best partial solution by adding switches until the prescribed maximum budget is reached. The best solution encountered across all intermediate switch counts is retained, so the returned solution may use fewer switches than the maximum budget. For each candidate switch set, communication pairs are inserted sequentially using obstacle-aware shortest paths that minimize their marginal contribution to the objective. For a segment of length d, introducing a new physical connection incurs d + 0 .5d, whereas reusing an existing physical connection incurs only the additional route cost 0.5d. We evaluate eight deterministic demand orderings and retain the best resulting network. Finally, one local-refinement pass considers single-switch replacements and accepts strictly improving configurations. 

Random Search. Random Search operates directly on the same hierarchical construction process as the learning-based methods, but uses no learned policy or value function. At each state, it samples uniformly from the currently admissible actions, thereby producing feasible routing configurations by construction. It evaluates 18 ,000 complete trajectories per GPU and generation and retains the best solution found. 

Genetic Algorithm. The Genetic Algorithm represents each candidate solution as a sequence of hierarchical decisions and evaluates it using the same routing environment. Starting from a random population, subsequent generations combine elitist selection, tournament selection, one-point crossover, per-decision mutation, and random immigration. Because action legality depends on preceding decisions, inherited actions that are no longer admissible are replaced by uniformly sampled legal actions. We use an elite pool of 64 programs per floorplan, tournament size 4, crossover probability 0.9, mutation probability 0.05 , and a 10% random immigrant fraction. Each generation evaluates 18 ,000 

complete trajectories per GPU. 

C.3 Compute and Evaluation 

Pretraining is performed on six NVIDIA L40S GPUs. PPO-EWMA, Gumbel MCTS, Random Search, and the Genetic Algorithm are each run for 48 hours on the 24 pretraining floorplans, with computation distributed approximately 16 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA uniformly across instances. The deterministic Heuristic is run once for each floorplan. Due to the computational cost of multi-floorplan pretraining, we train one pretrained model for each learning algorithm. Fine-tuning is performed for 24 hours on a single NVIDIA L40S GPU. Transfer results are aggregated over three independent fine-tuning runs for each target floorplan and initialization setting. All pretrained fine-tuning runs for a given learning algorithm are initialized from the same fixed pretrained checkpoint. 17 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

D Detailed Numerical Results 

This section provides detailed numerical results for all experiments. For each floorplan, we additionally report its main characteristics, including the switch budget, number of initiators, targets, and communication routes, and free space, defined as the percentage of the floorplan area not covered by blockages. We report the route length, wirelength, and best objective found by each method within its corresponding optimization budget. We similarly report transfer results on the four held-out floorplans. 

D.1 Pretraining 

Table 2: Detailed numerical results for Heuristic on the 24 pretraining floorplans. 

Heuristic Instance Switch budget Initiators Targets Routes Free space (%) Route length ↓ Wirelength ↓ Objective ↓

1 4 5 8 21 71.9 16.842 3.481 11.902 2 4 4 7 18 68.9 15.975 3.267 11.255 3 4 5 8 23 71.0 19.626 5.536 15.349 4 4 5 8 22 77.2 15.623 3.518 11.330 5 4 5 8 19 76.1 17.938 5.878 14.847 6 4 5 8 22 81.0 15.640 3.306 11.126 7 4 5 8 22 75.0 9.796 3.192 8.090 8 4 5 8 23 77.7 14.270 3.166 10.301 9 4 5 8 21 78.5 15.834 3.375 11.292 10 4 5 8 23 81.3 20.724 4.253 14.615 11 3 4 5 19 68.0 21.356 4.063 14.741 12 3 4 5 19 74.9 19.355 3.740 13.418 13 3 4 5 19 75.2 19.670 3.827 13.662 14 3 4 5 19 72.2 20.028 4.989 15.003 15 2 3 7 20 68.5 19.366 4.829 14.512 16 2 3 7 20 68.7 21.211 4.679 15.284 17 2 3 7 20 63.7 23.431 4.855 16.571 18 5 5 5 25 66.5 25.126 3.803 16.366 19 4 5 5 25 76.2 24.959 3.797 16.277 20 2 4 5 19 60.6 22.797 4.879 16.277 21 4 4 5 19 58.4 20.369 4.724 14.909 22 3 4 5 19 63.2 20.309 5.260 15.415 23 4 4 5 19 61.8 18.653 4.681 14.007 24 2 3 7 20 63.1 20.961 5.203 15.684 18 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Table 3: Detailed numerical results for Random search on the 24 pretraining floorplans. 

Random search Instance Switch budget Initiators Targets Routes Free space (%) Route length ↓ Wirelength ↓ Objective ↓

1 4 5 8 21 71.9 18.540 9.436 18.706 2 4 4 7 18 68.9 23.403 9.098 20.799 3 4 5 8 23 71.0 24.834 11.625 24.042 4 4 5 8 22 77.2 18.655 8.092 17.420 5 4 5 8 19 76.1 23.366 11.946 23.629 6 4 5 8 22 81.0 20.092 9.264 19.310 7 4 5 8 22 75.0 13.404 5.970 12.672 8 4 5 8 23 77.7 18.610 9.269 18.574 9 4 5 8 21 78.5 19.788 8.769 18.663 10 4 5 8 23 81.3 26.542 11.660 24.931 11 3 4 5 19 68.0 25.169 9.999 22.584 12 3 4 5 19 74.9 24.155 8.698 20.775 13 3 4 5 19 75.2 24.537 9.157 21.425 14 3 4 5 19 72.2 24.847 9.451 21.875 15 2 3 7 20 68.5 22.518 8.079 19.338 16 2 3 7 20 68.7 25.037 7.627 20.146 17 2 3 7 20 63.7 25.112 8.387 20.943 18 5 5 5 25 66.5 33.287 14.167 30.810 19 4 5 5 25 76.2 34.856 11.602 29.030 20 2 4 5 19 60.6 26.344 7.249 20.421 21 4 4 5 19 58.4 27.774 9.796 23.683 22 3 4 5 19 63.2 25.547 8.564 21.337 23 4 4 5 19 61.8 24.468 10.223 22.457 24 2 3 7 20 63.1 25.941 7.613 20.583 Table 4: Detailed numerical results for Genetic algorithm on the 24 pretraining floorplans. 

Genetic algorithm Instance Switch budget Initiators Targets Routes Free space (%) Route length ↓ Wirelength ↓ Objective ↓

1 4 5 8 21 71.9 17.970 5.397 14.382 2 4 4 7 18 68.9 16.293 5.853 13.999 3 4 5 8 23 71.0 22.228 5.740 16.854 4 4 5 8 22 77.2 15.589 4.827 12.622 5 4 5 8 19 76.1 20.256 7.842 17.970 6 4 5 8 22 81.0 14.812 5.701 13.107 7 4 5 8 22 75.0 9.982 3.233 8.224 8 4 5 8 23 77.7 15.332 4.288 11.954 9 4 5 8 21 78.5 17.572 5.366 14.152 10 4 5 8 23 81.3 19.600 5.999 15.799 11 3 4 5 19 68.0 21.500 5.728 16.478 12 3 4 5 19 74.9 21.160 5.924 16.504 13 3 4 5 19 75.2 18.885 5.796 15.238 14 3 4 5 19 72.2 20.606 4.754 15.057 15 2 3 7 20 68.5 19.638 4.315 14.134 16 2 3 7 20 68.7 21.019 4.727 15.236 17 2 3 7 20 63.7 20.303 5.087 15.239 18 5 5 5 25 66.5 25.411 7.175 19.881 19 4 5 5 25 76.2 29.455 7.334 22.062 20 2 4 5 19 60.6 21.177 5.138 15.726 21 4 4 5 19 58.4 19.118 7.021 16.580 22 3 4 5 19 63.2 19.422 4.821 14.531 23 4 4 5 19 61.8 19.822 4.710 14.621 24 2 3 7 20 63.1 21.269 4.643 15.277 19 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Table 5: Detailed numerical results for PPO-EWMA on the 24 pretraining floorplans. 

PPO-EWMA Instance Switch budget Initiators Targets Routes Free space (%) Route length ↓ Wirelength ↓ Objective ↓

1 4 5 8 21 71.9 17.150 3.591 12.166 2 4 4 7 18 68.9 15.969 3.499 11.484 3 4 5 8 23 71.0 20.328 5.506 15.670 4 4 5 8 22 77.2 15.109 4.021 11.576 5 4 5 8 19 76.1 19.440 4.997 14.717 6 4 5 8 22 81.0 15.130 3.395 10.960 7 4 5 8 22 75.0 10.702 3.244 8.595 8 4 5 8 23 77.7 14.482 3.111 10.352 9 4 5 8 21 78.5 15.860 3.212 11.142 10 4 5 8 23 81.3 19.434 3.612 13.329 11 3 4 5 19 68.0 20.563 3.869 14.151 12 3 4 5 19 74.9 19.274 3.724 13.361 13 3 4 5 19 75.2 18.415 4.080 13.287 14 3 4 5 19 72.2 19.741 3.722 13.593 15 2 3 7 20 68.5 19.638 4.315 14.134 16 2 3 7 20 68.7 20.543 4.998 15.269 17 2 3 7 20 63.7 20.303 5.087 15.239 18 5 5 5 25 66.5 27.654 5.320 19.147 19 4 5 5 25 76.2 27.178 4.899 18.488 20 2 4 5 19 60.6 22.841 4.396 15.817 21 4 4 5 19 58.4 18.409 3.890 13.095 22 3 4 5 19 63.2 20.314 3.832 13.989 23 4 4 5 19 61.8 18.419 3.199 12.409 24 2 3 7 20 63.1 21.269 4.643 15.277 Table 6: Detailed numerical results for Gumbel MCTS on the 24 pretraining floorplans. 

Gumbel MCTS Instance Switch budget Initiators Targets Routes Free space (%) Route length ↓ Wirelength ↓ Objective ↓

1 4 5 8 21 71.9 16.782 2.942 11.333 2 4 4 7 18 68.9 15.463 3.148 10.880 3 4 5 8 23 71.0 19.616 4.466 14.274 4 4 5 8 22 77.2 13.849 2.859 9.784 5 4 5 8 19 76.1 19.014 4.419 13.926 6 4 5 8 22 81.0 14.496 2.670 9.918 7 4 5 8 22 75.0 9.788 2.845 7.739 8 4 5 8 23 77.7 14.084 2.855 9.897 9 4 5 8 21 78.5 15.784 2.928 10.820 10 4 5 8 23 81.3 19.168 3.444 13.028 11 3 4 5 19 68.0 20.850 3.570 13.995 12 3 4 5 19 74.9 19.274 3.724 13.361 13 3 4 5 19 75.2 18.415 4.080 13.287 14 3 4 5 19 72.2 19.870 3.531 13.466 15 2 3 7 20 68.5 19.638 4.315 14.134 16 2 3 7 20 68.7 21.019 4.727 15.236 17 2 3 7 20 63.7 20.303 5.087 15.239 18 5 5 5 25 66.5 22.272 2.465 13.601 19 4 5 5 25 76.2 23.025 2.861 14.373 20 2 4 5 19 60.6 21.177 5.138 15.726 21 4 4 5 19 58.4 18.801 3.379 12.779 22 3 4 5 19 63.2 19.669 3.637 13.471 23 4 4 5 19 61.8 18.393 3.190 12.386 24 2 3 7 20 63.1 21.269 4.643 15.277 20 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

D.2 Fine-Tuning 

Table 7: Detailed PPO-EWMA fine-tuning results with pretrained and scratch initialization. Values are mean ± standard deviation over three runs. 

Instance Initialization Switch budget Initiators Targets Routes Free space (%) Route length ↓ Wirelength ↓ Objective ↓

1 Pretrained 2 5 6 20 76.1 21 .310 ±0.020 5.165 ±0.000 15 .820 ±0.010 

Scratch 21 .290 ±0.000 5.165 ±0.000 15 .810 ±0.000 

2 Pretrained 3 5 6 20 72.9 18 .765 ±0.010 4.550 ±0.005 13 .933 ±0.000 

Scratch 18 .765 ±0.010 4.550 ±0.005 13 .933 ±0.000 

3 Pretrained 4 5 6 20 71.1 18 .045 ±0.000 4.325 ±0.000 13 .347 ±0.000 

Scratch 20 .115 ±0.050 4.222 ±0.477 14 .280 ±0.503 

4 Pretrained 4 5 5 25 69.1 23 .554 ±0.139 3.048 ±0.126 14 .825 ±0.057 

Scratch 24 .000 ±0.304 3.079 ±0.198 15 .078 ±0.349 

Table 8: Detailed Gumbel MCTS fine-tuning results with pretrained and scratch initialization. Values are mean ±

standard deviation over three runs. 

Instance Initialization Switch budget Initiators Targets Routes Free space (%) Route length ↓ Wirelength ↓ Objective ↓

1 Pretrained 2 5 6 20 76.1 21 .290 ±0.000 5.165 ±0.000 15 .810 ±0.000 

Scratch 21 .290 ±0.000 5.165 ±0.000 15 .810 ±0.000 

2 Pretrained 3 5 6 20 72.9 20 .135 ±0.008 3.903 ±0.002 13 .971 ±0.005 

Scratch 20 .365 ±0.339 3.970 ±0.092 14 .153 ±0.262 

3 Pretrained 4 5 6 20 71.1 18 .895 ±0.523 3.970 ±0.264 13 .417 ±0.012 

Scratch 19 .532 ±0.207 3.815 ±0.142 13 .581 ±0.245 

4 Pretrained 4 5 5 25 69.1 20 .620 ±0.000 3.907 ±0.000 14 .217 ±0.000 

Scratch 23 .134 ±0.215 2.852 ±0.009 14 .419 ±0.116 

21 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

E Floorplans Generated by the Different Methods 

This section provides the solution corresponding to the best objective value found for each experiment and method. 

E.1 Pretraining Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 

×× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.357, 0.246), (0.424, 0.456), (0.618, 0.464) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 target0 init0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target5 init0 switch2 target6 

init1 switch2 switch1 target0 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init1 switch2 target6 

init1 switch2 target7 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch1 switch2 target6 

init2 switch1 switch2 target7 init3 switch0 switch1 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target7 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init4 switch2 switch1 target3 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init4 switch2 target6 

;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.424, 0.462), (0.369, 0.467), (0.357, 0.456), (0.190, 0.456) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 switch3 target5 init0 switch0 target6 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch3 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch3 switch1 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch2 switch3 switch0 target4 

init2 switch2 switch0 target6 init2 switch0 target7 

init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 switch0 target7 

init4 switch0 switch1 target1 

init4 switch1 switch2 switch3 switch0 target2 

init4 switch0 target3 init4 switch0 target4 

init4 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.622, 0.464), (0.622, 0.462), (0.356, 0.260), (0.622, 0.464) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch3 switch0 target3 

init0 switch3 switch2 target5 

init0 switch0 switch3 switch1 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 switch3 switch2 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch3 switch1 target6 

init1 switch0 switch1 target7 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch3 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target6 

init2 switch0 switch1 target7 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target7 

init4 switch0 switch1 switch3 switch2 target1 

init4 switch3 switch2 target2 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 switch3 switch1 target4 

init4 switch3 switch1 target6 

;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.357, 0.272), (0.618, 0.462) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 target5 init0 switch1 target6 

init1 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target7 

init2 switch0 target0 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch1 target6 init2 switch1 target7 

init3 switch0 switch1 target3 init3 switch0 switch1 target7 

init4 switch1 switch0 target1 init4 switch1 switch0 target2 

init4 switch1 target3 init4 switch1 switch0 target4 

init4 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.356, 0.094), (0.356, 0.260), (0.424, 0.456), (0.622, 0.464) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch1 target0 

init0 switch3 switch2 target3 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target5 

init0 switch3 target6 init1 switch3 switch2 switch1 target0 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch1 target2 

init1 switch3 switch2 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch3 target6 init1 switch3 target7 

init2 switch2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 

init2 switch2 switch3 target6 init2 switch2 switch3 target7 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target7 

init4 switch3 switch2 switch1 target1 

init4 switch3 switch2 switch1 target2 

init4 switch3 switch2 target3 

init4 switch3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 

init4 switch3 target6 

;;;

MCTS 

Figure 6: Instance 1. 22 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

> Blockage3 Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 switch0 switch1 switch2 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.387, 0.592), (0.771, 0.173), (0.771, 0.650) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target0 

init0 switch1 switch2 target1 init0 switch1 target2 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target5 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch1 target4 init1 switch0 target6 

init2 switch2 switch0 target0 init2 switch2 target1 

init2 switch2 switch1 target2 init2 switch2 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 switch1 target4 init2 switch2 switch0 target6 

init3 switch0 target0 init3 switch0 switch2 target1 

init3 switch0 target3 init3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

> Blockage3 Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.387, 0.657), (0.385, 0.544), (0.387, 0.475), (0.385, 0.544) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 switch0 switch2 target0 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch1 target1 init0 switch3 target2 

init0 switch3 target5 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target2 

init1 switch3 target4 init1 switch0 switch3 target6 

init2 switch2 switch3 target0 init2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch3 target2 init2 switch2 target3 

init2 switch3 target4 init2 switch3 target6 

init3 switch3 switch2 target0 init3 switch3 target1 

init3 switch3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch3 target4 init3 switch3 target6 

;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

> Blockage3 Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.750, 0.650), (0.383, 0.485), (0.780, 0.650), (0.387, 0.592) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 switch3 target5 

init1 switch3 switch0 target2 init1 switch3 switch0 target4 

init1 switch3 target6 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch2 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 switch3 target6 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch3 switch0 target1 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 target4 init3 switch3 target6 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

> Blockage3 Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.771, 0.529), (0.385, 0.592) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init1 switch1 switch0 target2 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 target6 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 switch1 target6 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch1 switch0 target1 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 init3 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

> Blockage3 Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.771, 0.657), (0.771, 0.529), (0.385, 0.592), (0.383, 0.529) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 

init0 switch1 switch0 target1 init0 switch1 target2 

init0 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target5 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch2 switch3 target6 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target6 

init3 switch3 target0 init3 switch3 switch2 switch0 target1 

init3 switch3 switch2 target3 

init3 switch3 switch2 switch0 switch1 target4 

init3 switch3 target6 

;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 7: Instance 2. 23 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.054, 0.135), (0.556, 0.404), (0.556, 0.559), (0.563, 0.724) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 target0 init0 switch2 switch1 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 target6 

init1 switch2 switch1 target1 init1 switch2 target2 

init1 switch2 switch3 target4 init1 switch2 switch1 target5 

init1 switch2 target6 init2 switch3 switch2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch3 target3 init2 switch3 target4 

init2 switch3 switch2 switch1 target5 

init3 switch3 switch2 switch1 target1 

init3 switch3 switch2 target2 init3 switch3 target3 

init3 switch3 target4 init4 switch1 target0 

init4 switch1 target1 init4 switch1 switch2 switch3 target4 

init4 switch1 target5 init4 switch1 switch2 target6 

init4 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.696, 0.573), (0.681, 0.532), (0.681, 0.584), (0.696, 0.559) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch1 switch3 target0 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init0 switch3 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 switch3 target6 

init1 switch3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch3 target4 

init1 switch3 target5 

init1 switch1 switch2 switch0 switch3 target6 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target3 init2 switch3 target4 

init2 switch3 target5 init3 switch3 target1 

init3 switch3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch3 target3 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init4 switch3 target0 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 switch3 target1 

init4 switch2 switch3 target4 

init4 switch0 switch2 switch3 target5 

init4 switch2 switch0 target6 init4 switch0 switch3 target7 

;;;;;;

Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.685, 0.584), (0.685, 0.573), (0.484, 0.415) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch2 target0 init0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 target6 

init1 switch1 switch2 target1 init1 switch1 switch2 target2 

init1 switch1 switch2 target4 init1 switch1 switch2 target5 

init1 switch1 target6 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init2 switch2 target5 init3 switch2 target1 

init3 switch2 target2 init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init3 switch2 target4 init4 switch2 target0 

init4 switch2 target1 init4 switch2 target4 

init4 switch2 target5 init4 switch2 switch1 target6 

init4 switch2 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;;

Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.475, 0.022), (0.563, 0.573), (0.563, 0.573) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 switch1 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 target6 

init1 switch2 switch1 target1 init1 switch2 target2 

init1 switch2 switch1 target4 init1 switch2 switch0 target5 

init1 switch2 target6 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 target3 init2 switch2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch2 switch0 target5 init3 switch2 switch1 target1 

init3 switch2 target2 init3 switch2 target3 

init3 switch2 switch1 target4 init4 switch1 switch2 target0 

init4 switch1 target1 init4 switch1 target4 

init4 switch0 target5 init4 switch1 switch2 target6 

init4 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

× ×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.282, 0.404), (0.563, 0.404), (0.685, 0.559), (0.563, 0.702) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 init0 switch2 target6 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch3 target4 

init1 switch2 switch1 target5 init1 switch2 target6 

init2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target0 init2 switch3 target3 

init2 switch3 target4 init2 switch3 switch1 target5 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch0 target2 init3 switch3 target3 

init3 switch3 target4 init4 switch1 switch0 target0 

init4 switch1 switch0 target1 init4 switch1 switch3 target4 

init4 switch1 target5 init4 switch1 switch2 target6 

init4 switch1 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 8: Instance 3. 24 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.144, 0.434), (0.478, 0.443), (0.731, 0.381) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target6 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target7 

init1 switch2 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init1 switch2 target6 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 switch1 target5 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target6 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 target1 init3 switch1 target5 

init3 switch1 switch2 target6 init3 switch1 switch2 target7 

init4 switch1 target0 init4 switch1 switch0 target2 

init4 switch2 target3 init4 switch2 target6 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.566, 0.513), (0.762, 0.546), (0.574, 0.558), (0.566, 0.578) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target1 init0 switch0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch0 switch2 target6 init0 switch0 target7 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch3 target0 

init1 switch0 switch2 target3 init1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch0 target6 init2 switch0 switch1 target1 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 target6 

init3 switch2 switch0 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target5 init3 switch1 switch0 target6 

init3 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target7 

init4 switch3 switch1 switch0 target0 init4 switch0 target2 

init4 switch0 target3 init4 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.584, 0.403), (0.536, 0.558), (0.147, 0.558) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target1 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 target6 init0 switch2 switch1 target7 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 target4 init1 switch0 target6 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target3 

init2 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 switch1 target5 

init2 switch0 target6 init3 switch1 switch0 target0 

init3 switch1 switch0 target1 init3 switch1 target5 

init3 switch1 switch0 target6 init3 switch1 target7 

init4 switch0 target0 init4 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init4 switch0 target3 init4 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.193, 0.434), (0.566, 0.434) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target1 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 target6 init0 switch1 target7 

init1 switch1 target0 init1 switch1 target3 

init1 switch1 switch0 target4 init1 switch1 target6 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 switch1 target3 

init2 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 switch1 target5 

init2 switch0 switch1 target6 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch1 target1 init3 switch1 target5 

init3 switch1 target6 init3 switch1 target7 

init4 switch1 target0 init4 switch1 switch0 target2 

init4 switch1 target3 init4 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.193, 0.513), (0.584, 0.403), (0.574, 0.612), (0.724, 0.331) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch3 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch3 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch3 target6 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target7 

init1 switch3 switch1 switch2 target0 init1 switch3 target3 

init1 switch3 switch1 switch0 target4 init1 switch3 target6 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target6 

init3 switch2 target0 init3 switch2 switch1 switch3 target1 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target5 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch3 target6 init3 switch2 target7 

init4 switch1 switch2 target0 init4 switch1 switch0 target2 

init4 switch1 switch3 target3 init4 switch1 switch3 target6 

;;;;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 9: Instance 4. 25 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

> Blockage3

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.193, 0.236), (0.558, 0.189), (0.558, 0.801) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch2 target3 init0 switch1 target4 

init0 switch1 switch0 target5 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 switch1 target4 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 target2 init2 switch2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target7 init3 switch2 target0 

init3 switch2 target1 init3 switch2 target2 

init3 switch0 target5 init3 switch0 target7 

init4 switch1 switch2 target1 init4 switch1 switch2 target3 

init4 switch1 target6 init4 switch1 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

> Blockage3

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.581, 0.526), (0.162, 0.240), (0.576, 0.543) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target3 init0 switch2 switch0 target4 

init0 switch2 target5 init1 switch2 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target4 init1 switch2 target5 

init2 switch2 target0 init2 switch2 target2 

init2 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 switch0 switch1 target7 

init3 switch2 target0 init3 switch2 target1 

init3 switch2 target2 init3 switch2 target5 

init3 switch2 target7 init4 switch1 target1 

init4 switch2 target3 init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target6 

init4 switch2 target7 

;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

> Blockage3

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.576, 0.585), (0.162, 0.189), (0.463, 0.179), (0.576, 0.351) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target3 init0 switch0 target4 

init0 switch3 target5 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target4 init1 switch0 switch3 target5 

init2 switch0 target0 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target7 

init3 switch0 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 switch3 target5 

init3 switch0 target7 init4 switch0 target1 

init4 switch0 target3 init4 switch2 target6 

init4 switch2 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

> Blockage3

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.558, 0.179), (0.558, 0.797) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target3 init0 switch0 target4 

init0 switch0 target5 init1 switch1 target1 

init1 switch1 switch0 target4 init1 switch1 switch0 target5 

init2 switch1 target0 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch1 switch0 target7 

init3 switch1 target0 init3 switch1 target1 

init3 switch1 target2 init3 switch1 switch0 target5 

init3 switch1 switch0 target7 init4 switch0 switch1 target1 

init4 switch0 switch1 target3 init4 switch0 target6 

init4 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

> Blockage3

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.832, 0.801), (0.558, 0.801), (0.463, 0.179), (0.576, 0.266) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 switch1 switch0 target3 init0 switch3 target4 

init0 switch3 switch2 target5 init1 switch0 switch1 target1 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch3 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch3 switch2 target5 

init2 switch1 switch0 target0 init2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 switch3 target4 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch2 target7 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 target1 

init3 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch1 switch3 switch2 target5 

init3 switch1 switch3 switch2 target7 

init4 switch2 switch3 switch1 target1 

init4 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target3 

init4 switch2 switch3 target6 init4 switch2 target7 

;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 10: Instance 5. 26 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 

××× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.012, 0.611), (0.114, 0.087), (0.267, 0.611), (0.438, 0.611) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch1 target1 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch1 target2 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch3 target3 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch1 target4 

init0 switch0 switch2 target5 init0 switch0 target6 

init1 switch3 target0 init1 switch3 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 target6 init1 switch3 target7 

init2 switch2 switch3 target0 init3 switch3 target0 

init3 switch3 switch2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch3 switch2 target5 

init3 switch3 switch2 switch0 target6 init3 switch3 target7 

init4 switch3 target0 init4 switch3 switch2 switch1 target1 

init4 switch3 target3 init4 switch3 switch2 switch1 target4 

init4 switch3 switch2 target5 init4 switch3 target7 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.400, 0.670), (0.619, 0.717), (0.547, 0.667), (0.438, 0.717) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 target1 init0 switch3 target2 

init0 switch0 switch3 target3 init0 switch3 target4 

init0 switch0 switch3 target5 init0 switch3 target6 

init1 switch3 target0 init1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 target6 init1 switch3 target7 

init2 switch3 target0 init3 switch3 target0 

init3 switch3 target4 init3 switch0 target5 

init3 switch3 switch0 target6 

init3 switch1 switch0 switch3 target7 init4 switch3 target0 

init4 switch3 target1 init4 switch3 switch0 switch2 target3 

init4 switch3 target4 init4 switch3 target5 

init4 switch2 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.438, 0.611), (0.607, 0.717), (0.438, 0.717), (0.014, 0.611) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target1 init0 switch3 target2 

init0 switch0 target3 init0 switch3 switch0 target4 

init0 switch0 target5 init0 switch3 target6 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch3 target6 init1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch2 switch1 target0 

init3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 target4 

init3 switch0 target5 init3 switch0 switch3 target6 

init3 switch0 target7 init4 switch1 target0 

init4 switch0 target1 init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch0 target4 init4 switch0 target5 

init4 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.114, 0.087), (0.547, 0.611), (0.014, 0.611) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch0 target1 init0 switch2 switch0 target2 

init0 switch2 switch1 target3 init0 switch2 switch0 target4 

init0 switch2 target5 init0 switch2 target6 

init1 switch1 target0 init1 switch1 target3 

init1 switch1 switch2 target6 init1 switch1 target7 

init2 switch1 target0 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 init3 switch1 switch2 target5 

init3 switch1 switch2 target6 init3 switch1 target7 

init4 switch1 target0 init4 switch1 switch0 target1 

init4 switch1 target3 init4 switch1 switch0 target4 

init4 switch1 switch2 target5 init4 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.010, 0.444), (0.198, 0.633), (0.535, 0.633), (0.045, 0.087) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch3 target1 init0 switch0 switch3 target2 

init0 switch1 switch2 target3 init0 switch0 switch3 target4 

init0 switch1 target5 init0 switch0 target6 

init1 switch2 target0 init1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target6 init1 switch2 target7 

init2 switch1 switch2 target0 init3 switch2 target0 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 switch3 target4 

init3 switch2 switch1 target5 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target6 init3 switch2 target7 

init4 switch2 target0 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 switch3 target1 

init4 switch2 target3 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 switch3 target4 

init4 switch2 switch1 target5 init4 switch2 target7 

;;;;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 11: Instance 6. 27 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3

× ×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.500, 0.292), (0.617, 0.305), (0.617, 0.466), (0.626, 0.417) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 target4 init0 switch3 switch2 target6 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init1 switch1 switch2 target2 init1 switch1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch1 target4 init1 switch0 target5 

init1 switch1 switch2 target6 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch2 switch3 target1 init2 switch2 target2 

init2 switch2 switch3 target4 init2 switch2 target6 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target5 init3 switch1 target7 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init4 switch2 target3 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target5 

init4 switch2 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.617, 0.221), (0.617, 0.320), (0.623, 0.376), (0.615, 0.380) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 target4 init0 switch3 switch0 switch2 target6 

init1 switch3 switch0 target0 

init1 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init1 switch3 switch0 target2 init1 switch3 target3 

init1 switch1 switch2 switch3 target4 init1 switch3 target5 

init1 switch3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target6 

init2 switch3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch3 target2 init2 switch3 target4 

init2 switch3 switch2 target6 init3 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch0 target4 init3 switch3 target5 

init3 switch3 switch2 switch1 target7 

init4 switch3 switch0 target0 init4 switch3 target3 

init4 switch3 target5 init4 switch3 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.615, 0.305), (0.615, 0.466), (0.615, 0.429) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target4 init0 switch2 switch1 target6 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch0 switch1 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 target4 init1 switch0 target5 

init1 switch0 switch1 target6 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 switch2 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch2 target4 init2 switch1 target6 

init3 switch0 switch1 target2 init3 switch0 target4 

init3 switch0 target5 init3 switch0 target7 

init4 switch1 switch0 target0 init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch1 switch0 target5 init4 switch1 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;;

Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.615, 0.429), (0.615, 0.221) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target4 init0 switch0 target6 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 target4 init1 switch0 switch1 target5 

init1 switch0 target6 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target6 

init3 switch1 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 target5 init3 switch1 target7 

init4 switch0 target0 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 switch1 target5 init4 switch0 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.615, 0.380), (0.615, 0.466), (0.615, 0.305), (0.536, 0.305) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target4 init0 switch1 target6 

init1 switch3 target0 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 switch1 target1 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 target4 init1 switch3 target5 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 switch1 target6 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch1 target6 

init3 switch2 switch0 switch1 target2 

init3 switch2 switch0 target4 init3 switch2 switch3 target5 

init3 switch2 target7 

init4 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 

init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target5 

init4 switch1 switch0 switch2 target7 

;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 12: Instance 7. 28 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2
> Blockage3
> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 

× ×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.326, 0.681), (0.660, 0.681), (0.677, 0.329), (0.686, 0.223) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target6 

init1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 init1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 switch3 target6 init1 switch2 switch3 target7 

init2 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch1 switch0 target2 init2 switch1 target3 

init2 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target5 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 switch1 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target5 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target6 

init4 switch1 switch0 target2 init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch1 target5 init4 switch1 switch2 switch3 target6 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2
> Blockage3
> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.684, 0.681), (0.686, 0.694), (0.619, 0.687), (0.690, 0.687) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target2 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch3 target5 

init0 switch0 switch3 target6 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch3 target6 init1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch3 target2 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch3 target3 

init2 switch0 switch3 switch1 target4 

init2 switch2 switch3 switch0 target5 

init3 switch0 switch3 switch1 switch2 target2 

init3 switch3 target3 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target5 

init3 switch0 target6 init4 switch0 target2 

init4 switch1 switch3 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 switch1 target5 init4 switch0 target6 

;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2
> Blockage3
> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

×× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.677, 0.425), (0.326, 0.687), (0.653, 0.687) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch0 target0 init0 switch2 switch0 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch2 target5 

init0 switch2 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 switch2 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch0 switch2 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init3 switch1 target2 

init3 switch2 switch0 target3 init3 switch2 target5 

init3 switch2 switch0 target6 init4 switch2 target2 

init4 switch2 switch0 target3 init4 switch2 target5 

init4 switch2 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;;

Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2
> Blockage3
> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.653, 0.687), (0.677, 0.363) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target5 

init0 switch0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target1 

init1 switch1 switch0 target2 init1 switch1 target3 

init1 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target7 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init3 switch0 target2 

init3 switch0 switch1 target3 init3 switch0 target5 

init3 switch0 switch1 target6 init4 switch0 target2 

init4 switch0 switch1 target3 init4 switch0 target5 

init4 switch0 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2
> Blockage3
> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.653, 0.687), (0.686, 0.200), (0.677, 0.363), (0.371, 0.687) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 switch0 switch2 target0 

init0 switch3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target1 

init0 switch3 target2 init0 switch3 switch0 target5 

init0 switch3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target6 

init1 switch2 switch1 target1 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch3 target2 init1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 target6 init1 switch2 switch1 target7 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch0 switch3 target2 init2 switch0 target3 

init2 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target5 

init3 switch3 target2 init3 switch3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch3 switch0 target5 

init3 switch3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target6 

init4 switch0 switch3 target2 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 target5 init4 switch0 switch2 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 13: Instance 8. 29 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2 

×× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.131, 0.274), (0.131, 0.393), (0.464, 0.393) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target5 init0 switch0 target7 

init1 switch1 switch2 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target5 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 target1 init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 target5 init3 switch1 target6 

init4 switch2 target3 init4 switch2 target5 

init4 switch2 switch1 target6 

init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.080, 0.280), (0.086, 0.292), (0.185, 0.263), (0.131, 0.263) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 target2 init0 switch0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch0 target4 init0 switch0 switch1 switch3 target5 

init0 switch0 switch3 target7 init1 switch3 switch1 target3 

init1 switch3 target7 init2 switch3 switch1 target0 

init2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init2 switch3 target5 init3 switch3 target0 

init3 switch3 target1 init3 switch2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch2 switch0 switch3 target5 

init3 switch2 switch3 target6 

init4 switch3 switch2 switch1 target3 

init4 switch0 switch3 target5 init4 switch0 target6 

init4 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.087, 0.391), (0.087, 0.391), (0.087, 0.395), (0.087, 0.391) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 target4 init0 switch0 target5 

init0 switch0 target7 

init1 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 switch2 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch0 target5 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch3 switch2 target0 

init3 switch1 switch0 target1 init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

init3 switch0 target5 init3 switch0 target6 

init4 switch1 switch0 target3 init4 switch1 switch0 target5 

init4 switch1 switch0 target6 init4 switch1 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.464, 0.393), (0.087, 0.393) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 target4 init0 switch1 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target7 init1 switch1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch1 target7 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 switch0 target5 

init3 switch1 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 init3 switch1 switch0 target5 

init3 switch1 target6 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 target5 init4 switch0 switch1 target6 

init4 switch0 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.464, 0.395), (0.080, 0.274), (0.087, 0.671), (0.095, 0.393) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch3 switch0 target2 

init0 switch1 switch3 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 switch3 switch0 target4 

init0 switch1 switch3 switch0 target5 init0 switch1 target7 

init1 switch3 switch0 target3 init1 switch3 switch1 target7 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch2 target0 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch0 target1 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch0 target3 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch0 target5 

init3 switch3 switch2 target0 init3 switch3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch3 switch0 target4 init3 switch3 switch0 target5 

init3 switch3 switch2 target6 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 target5 init4 switch0 switch3 switch2 target6 

init4 switch0 switch3 switch1 target7 

;;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 14: Instance 9. 30 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5  

> init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7 switch0 switch1 switch2

×× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.292, 0.108), (0.377, 0.338), (0.718, 0.338) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init0 switch1 switch2 target4 init1 switch2 switch1 target1 

init1 switch2 target3 init1 switch2 target4 

init1 switch2 target6 init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch0 switch1 target0 init2 switch0 switch1 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target6 init2 switch0 target7 

init3 switch2 switch1 target1 init3 switch2 switch1 target2 

init3 switch2 target3 init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target7 

init4 switch0 switch1 target1 init4 switch0 switch1 target2 

init4 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init4 switch0 switch1 target5 init4 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.292, 0.098), (0.303, 0.108), (0.260, 0.098), (0.292, 0.335) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 switch1 switch0 target2 init0 switch3 target3 

init0 switch3 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch3 target1 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch3 target3 init1 switch3 target4 

init1 switch3 target6 init1 switch3 target7 

init2 switch2 switch3 target0 init2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch3 target2 init2 switch3 target3 

init2 switch3 target6 init2 switch2 switch0 switch1 target7 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init3 switch3 target2 init3 switch3 target3 

init3 switch0 switch2 target7 

init4 switch3 switch2 switch1 target1 init4 switch3 target2 

init4 switch2 switch3 target4 

init4 switch3 switch1 switch2 target5 

init4 switch1 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.099, 0.338), (0.534, 0.486), (0.099, 0.098), (0.609, 0.486) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch3 target2 init0 switch1 switch3 target3 

init0 switch1 switch3 target4 init1 switch3 switch0 target1 

init1 switch3 target3 init1 switch3 target4 

init1 switch3 target6 init1 switch3 target7 

init2 switch0 target0 init2 switch0 target1 

init2 switch0 switch3 target2 init2 switch0 switch3 target3 

init2 switch0 switch3 target6 init2 switch2 target7 

init3 switch3 target1 init3 switch3 target2 

init3 switch3 target3 init3 switch3 target7 

init4 switch0 target1 init4 switch0 switch3 target2 

init4 switch0 switch3 target4 init4 switch0 target5 

init4 switch2 target7 

;;;;;;;;;;;

Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.282, 0.108), (0.282, 0.338), (0.609, 0.486) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 target3 

init0 switch2 target4 init1 switch2 switch1 target1 

init1 switch2 target3 init1 switch2 target4 

init1 switch2 target6 init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target7 

init2 switch0 switch1 target0 init2 switch0 switch1 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target6 init2 switch0 target7 

init3 switch2 switch1 target1 init3 switch2 target2 

init3 switch2 target3 init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target7 

init4 switch0 switch1 target1 

init4 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init4 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init4 switch0 switch1 target5 init4 switch0 target7 

;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 target7

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.720, 0.642), (0.534, 0.346), (0.282, 0.108), (0.282, 0.335) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch1 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init1 switch0 switch1 switch3 target1 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 target6 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch3 switch2 target7 

init2 switch2 switch3 target0 init2 switch2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch2 switch3 switch1 target2 

init2 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target6 

init2 switch2 target7 init3 switch1 switch3 target1 

init3 switch1 target2 init3 switch1 switch0 target3 

init3 switch1 switch3 switch2 target7 

init4 switch2 switch3 target1 

init4 switch2 switch3 switch1 target2 

init4 switch2 switch3 switch1 target4 

init4 switch2 switch3 target5 init4 switch2 target7 

;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 15: Instance 10. 31 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

> Blockage9

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.074, 0.457), (0.500, 0.046), (0.587, 0.457) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch2 target0 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 switch0 target1 init2 switch2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch2 switch1 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

> Blockage9

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.835, 0.015), (0.710, 0.062), (0.250, 0.155) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch2 switch0 target3 init1 switch2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch0 switch1 target0 init2 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch1 target2 init2 switch0 target3 

init2 switch0 switch1 target4 init3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch2 target1 init3 switch2 switch1 target2 

init3 switch2 switch1 target3 init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

> Blockage9

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.250, 0.062), (0.985, 0.500), (0.985, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch2 switch1 target0 init2 switch0 target1 

init2 switch0 target2 init2 switch2 target3 

init2 switch2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch2 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

> Blockage9

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.485), (0.587, 0.468), (0.015, 0.468) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

> Blockage9

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.587, 0.385), (0.985, 0.385), (0.040, 0.457) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target1 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 switch2 target1 

init3 switch0 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 16: Instance 11. 32 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2 

× × ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.015, 0.250), (0.500, 0.250), (0.993, 0.242) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch2 switch1 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.595, 0.256), (0.654, 0.276) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 switch1 target1 

init1 switch1 target2 init1 switch1 target3 

init1 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 switch1 target1 

init3 switch1 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.004, 0.661), (0.500, 0.015), (0.500, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 target1 init2 switch2 target2 

init2 switch2 switch1 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch2 target0 init3 switch2 target1 

init3 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.993, 0.250), (0.500, 0.250), (0.015, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.993, 0.257), (0.505, 0.242), (0.015, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 17: Instance 12. 33 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.125, 0.207), (0.500, 0.171), (0.985, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch2 switch1 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.473, 0.171), (0.501, 0.207), (0.494, 0.171) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch0 switch2 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 target2 init2 switch0 switch2 target3 

init2 switch2 target4 init3 switch2 target0 

init3 switch0 switch2 target1 init3 switch2 target2 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.500, 0.171), (0.985, 0.419), (0.015, 0.500) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.250), (0.500, 0.171), (0.015, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.250), (0.501, 0.171), (0.015, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 18: Instance 13. 34 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2 

×× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.015, 0.299), (0.568, 0.265), (0.657, 0.265) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init2 switch2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 init2 switch2 target3 

init2 switch2 target4 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch1 switch0 target1 init3 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch1 switch2 target3 init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.532, 0.100), (0.568, 0.108), (0.497, 0.108) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 switch2 target0 

init2 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 switch2 target4 

init3 switch2 target0 init3 switch2 target1 

init3 switch2 target2 init3 switch2 target3 

init3 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.250, 0.232), (0.985, 0.250), (0.985, 0.497) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init2 switch1 switch2 target0 init2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init2 switch1 switch0 target2 init2 switch1 target3 

init2 switch1 switch2 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.250), (0.568, 0.232), (0.126, 0.306) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.629, 0.250), (0.985, 0.265), (0.015, 0.306) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target1 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 switch2 target1 

init3 switch0 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 19: Instance 14. 35 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 switch0 switch1 

× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.040, 0.424), (0.814, 0.424) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.698, 0.410), (0.264, 0.392) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 target4 init0 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.960, 0.424), (0.282, 0.424) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 target4 init0 switch1 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.282, 0.424), (0.960, 0.424) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target4 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

Blockage11 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.268, 0.400), (0.960, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target4 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 20: Instance 15. 36 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

Blockage16 

Blockage17 

init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 switch0 switch1 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.350, 0.346), (0.960, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target4 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

Blockage16 

Blockage17 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.828, 0.354), (0.333, 0.346) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 target4 init0 switch1 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch0 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch0 target5 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

Blockage16 

Blockage17 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.960, 0.400), (0.350, 0.394) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 target4 init0 switch1 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

Blockage16 

Blockage17 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.040, 0.394), (0.960, 0.354) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13

Blockage14 

Blockage15 

Blockage16 

Blockage17 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.890, 0.400), (0.040, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch0 target4 init0 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 switch0 target1 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 21: Instance 16. 37 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9  

> init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 switch0 switch1

× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.040, 0.514), (0.624, 0.514) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch1 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch1 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.008, 0.682), (0.684, 0.514) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target4 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch1 target4 

init1 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.040, 0.514), (0.960, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.040, 0.514), (0.960, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.960, 0.400), (0.040, 0.514) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch0 target4 init0 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 switch0 target1 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 22: Instance 17. 38 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8
> Blockage9

Blockage10   

> init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2

×× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.166, 0.140), (0.476, 0.708), (0.957, 0.724) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 switch2 target4 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 switch2 target2 

init1 switch1 switch0 target3 init1 switch1 switch2 target4 

init2 switch2 switch1 target0 init2 switch2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch2 target2 init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 target4 init3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch0 switch1 target1 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init4 switch2 switch1 target0 init4 switch2 switch1 target1 

init4 switch2 target2 init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init4 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8
> Blockage9

Blockage10   

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 switch4 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 5Switch Positions: (0.186, 0.724), (0.198, 0.775), (0.458, 0.755), (0.439, 0.755), (0.439, 0.708) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch4 switch3 target1 

init0 switch4 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch4 target4 init1 switch3 switch0 target0 

init1 switch4 target1 init1 switch0 switch3 switch4 target2 

init1 switch3 target3 init1 switch4 target4 

init2 switch3 switch1 switch2 switch4 target0 

init2 switch3 switch2 switch1 target1 init2 switch4 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch4 target3 

init2 switch3 switch4 target4 init3 switch4 target0 

init3 switch4 switch3 target1 init3 switch4 target2 

init3 switch4 switch3 target3 init3 switch4 target4 

init4 switch3 switch0 target0 

init4 switch1 switch0 switch4 target1 init4 switch4 target2 

init4 switch1 switch3 target3 init4 switch4 target4 

;;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8
> Blockage9

Blockage10   

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.458, 0.708), (0.458, 0.863), (0.458, 0.818), (0.971, 0.292) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 switch1 target1 

init0 switch2 switch0 target2 init0 switch2 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 target4 init1 switch1 switch2 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch2 switch0 target2 

init1 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 switch2 target0 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch3 target4 

init3 switch0 switch2 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 target4 init4 switch0 switch2 target0 

init4 switch0 target1 init4 switch3 target2 

init4 switch0 target3 init4 switch3 target4 

;;;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8
> Blockage9

Blockage10   

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.476, 0.708), (0.476, 0.861) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 target4 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target0 init2 switch0 target1 

init2 switch0 target2 init2 switch0 target3 

init2 switch0 target4 init3 switch0 target0 

init3 switch0 target1 init3 switch0 target2 

init3 switch0 target3 init3 switch0 target4 

init4 switch0 target0 init4 switch0 target1 

init4 switch0 target2 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

> Blockage8
> Blockage9

Blockage10   

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 switch4 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 5Switch Positions: (0.198, 0.775), (0.189, 0.857), (0.458, 0.775), (0.172, 0.031), (0.967, 0.708) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 switch0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch4 target2 

init0 switch1 switch0 switch3 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 switch2 switch4 target4 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 switch4 target2 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch3 target3 

init1 switch2 switch4 target4 

init2 switch4 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch4 switch2 target1 init2 switch4 target2 

init2 switch4 switch2 switch0 switch3 target3 

init2 switch4 target4 init3 switch3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch3 switch0 switch2 target1 

init3 switch3 switch0 switch2 switch4 target2 

init3 switch3 target3 

init3 switch3 switch0 switch2 switch4 target4 

init4 switch4 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init4 switch4 switch2 target1 init4 switch4 target2 

init4 switch4 switch2 switch0 switch3 target3 

init4 switch4 target4 

;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 23: Instance 18. 39 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10
> Blockage11
> Blockage12
> Blockage13
> init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.233, 0.157), (0.486, 0.724), (0.967, 0.704) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 switch2 target4 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 switch2 target2 

init1 switch1 switch0 target3 init1 switch1 switch2 target4 

init2 switch2 switch1 target0 init2 switch2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch2 target2 init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 target4 init3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch0 switch1 target1 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init4 switch2 switch1 target0 init4 switch2 switch1 target1 

init4 switch2 target2 init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init4 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10
> Blockage11
> Blockage12
> Blockage13
> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.391, 0.848), (0.486, 0.756), (0.967, 0.873), (0.427, 0.861) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 switch2 switch3 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target0 init2 switch0 switch3 target1 

init2 switch1 target2 init2 switch0 target3 

init2 switch0 target4 init3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch0 target1 init3 switch0 target2 

init3 switch1 switch0 target3 

init3 switch1 switch3 switch0 target4 init4 switch0 target0 

init4 switch0 target1 init4 switch0 target2 

init4 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10
> Blockage11
> Blockage12
> Blockage13
> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.486, 0.653), (0.486, 0.653), (0.486, 0.653), (0.456, 0.862) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 target0 init0 switch3 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch1 target4 init1 switch3 target0 

init1 switch1 switch0 target1 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 switch0 target3 init1 switch1 target4 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch0 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target0 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

init4 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 init4 switch0 target1 

init4 switch1 switch0 target2 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10
> Blockage11
> Blockage12
> Blockage13
> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.456, 0.862), (0.486, 0.714) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch1 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target0 init2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch1 target2 init2 switch1 target3 

init2 switch1 target4 init3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch1 target1 init3 switch1 target2 

init3 switch1 target3 init3 switch1 target4 

init4 switch1 target0 init4 switch1 target1 

init4 switch1 target2 init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8  

> Blockage9
> Blockage10
> Blockage11
> Blockage12
> Blockage13
> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.967, 0.704), (0.198, 0.862), (0.456, 0.862), (0.198, 0.031) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 

init0 switch1 switch3 target3 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 

init1 switch2 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 switch0 target2 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch3 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 switch2 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 switch3 target3 

init2 switch0 target4 init3 switch3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 

init3 switch3 target3 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 

init4 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 

init4 switch0 switch2 target1 init4 switch0 target2 

init4 switch0 switch2 switch1 switch3 target3 

init4 switch0 target4 

;;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 24: Instance 19. 40 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.487, 0.389), (0.968, 0.447) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.409, 0.090), (0.985, 0.090) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch1 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.015, 0.332), (0.750, 0.090) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch1 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.250, 0.332), (0.985, 0.424) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4
> Blockage5

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.968, 0.424), (0.250, 0.332) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch1 target1 

init1 switch1 target2 init1 switch1 target3 

init1 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 switch1 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 target1 

init3 switch1 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 25: Instance 20. 41 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.015, 0.250), (0.515, 0.057), (0.643, 0.215) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch2 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init2 switch2 switch1 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.968, 0.210), (0.732, 0.192), (0.750, 0.215), (0.784, 0.210) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 switch3 target0 init0 switch3 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target3 

init1 switch3 target0 init1 switch3 target1 

init1 switch3 target2 init1 switch3 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 target4 init2 switch3 target0 

init2 switch2 switch3 target1 init2 switch3 target2 

init2 switch3 target3 init2 switch3 target4 

init3 switch2 switch3 target0 init3 switch3 target1 

init3 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 switch3 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 switch3 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9  

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.015, 0.500), (0.988, 0.500), (0.500, 0.129) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch2 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch2 target1 init2 switch2 target2 

init2 switch2 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch2 target0 init3 switch2 target1 

init3 switch2 target2 init3 switch2 target3 

init3 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.500, 0.129), (0.985, 0.250), (0.015, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target1 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 switch2 target1 

init3 switch0 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

> Blockage4

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> Blockage8

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.250), (0.500, 0.129), (0.015, 0.500), (0.015, 0.250) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 

init0 switch1 switch3 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch3 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch2 target1 init1 switch2 switch3 target2 

init1 switch2 switch3 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch3 switch1 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 

init3 switch1 switch3 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch3 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;

MCTS 

Figure 26: Instance 21. 42 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.015, 0.435), (0.500, 0.204), (0.762, 0.435) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch2 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 switch0 target1 init2 switch2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch2 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.500, 0.429), (0.559, 0.415), (0.520, 0.415) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 target3 

init1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch1 switch2 switch0 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch0 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.249, 0.429), (0.500, 0.015), (0.985, 0.429) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch2 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 target4 init2 switch2 target0 

init2 switch2 switch0 target1 init2 switch2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch2 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch0 switch2 target0 init3 switch0 target1 

init3 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch0 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.429), (0.608, 0.415), (0.015, 0.415) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.250), (0.500, 0.201), (0.015, 0.346) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 27: Instance 22. 43 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12  

> init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3

××× ×

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.229, 0.320), (0.500, 0.015), (0.500, 0.320), (0.750, 0.320) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 init1 switch0 target1 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target3 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch3 target4 init2 switch3 target0 

init2 switch3 switch2 switch0 target1 

init2 switch3 switch2 switch0 target2 init2 switch3 target3 

init2 switch3 target4 init3 switch2 switch3 target0 

init3 switch2 switch0 target1 init3 switch2 switch0 target2 

init3 switch1 target3 init3 switch2 switch3 target4 

;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.469, 0.194), (0.469, 0.267), (0.519, 0.205) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target3 

init1 switch2 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch1 switch2 target2 init1 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch2 target1 init2 switch2 target2 

init2 switch2 target3 init2 switch2 target4 

init3 switch2 switch1 target0 init3 switch2 switch1 target1 

init3 switch1 switch0 switch2 target2 init3 switch2 target3 

init3 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.750, 0.320), (0.671, 0.014), (0.015, 0.326) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch0 target0 init0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch2 target1 init2 switch0 switch2 target2 

init2 switch0 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch0 target0 init3 switch0 switch2 target1 

init3 switch0 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12  

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.500, 0.259), (0.985, 0.259), (0.015, 0.326) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 switch2 target1 

init0 switch0 switch2 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch0 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target4 init2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target1 

init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 switch2 target1 

init3 switch0 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.985, 0.259), (0.500, 0.022), (0.500, 0.259), (0.015, 0.339) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target0 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch3 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 target0 init1 switch3 target1 

init1 switch3 target2 init1 switch3 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 target4 init2 switch0 target0 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch3 target1 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch3 target2 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 

;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 28: Instance 23. 44 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

Blockage13 

init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 switch0 switch1 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.124, 0.378), (0.960, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 switch1 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

Heuristic Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

Blockage13 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.906, 0.192), (0.356, 0.370) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 switch0 target1 

init0 switch1 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 target4 init0 switch1 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 target4 

init1 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch1 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 target3 init2 switch1 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Random search Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

Blockage13 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.356, 0.378), (0.960, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target4 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; Genetic algorithm Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

Blockage13 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.356, 0.378), (0.960, 0.400) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 switch1 target2 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target4 init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init0 switch0 target6 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 switch1 target2 

init1 switch0 target3 init1 switch0 switch1 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 target4 

init2 switch1 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target6 

;;;;;;;;;;

PPO Blockage0 

> Blockage1

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> Blockage10
> Blockage11

Blockage12 

Blockage13 

switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5 target6 

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.960, 0.400), (0.333, 0.370) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 switch0 target2 init0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch1 switch0 target4 init0 switch1 switch0 target5 

init0 switch1 target6 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch1 target3 init1 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch1 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 target5 init2 switch0 switch1 target6 

;;;;;;;;;; MCTS 

Figure 29: Instance 24. 45 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA 

E.2 Fine-Tuning 

46 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.620, 0.890), (0.620, 0.410) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target3 init0 switch1 target5 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init1 switch0 switch1 target5 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 switch1 target5 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch1 target4 init3 switch1 target5 

init4 switch1 target1 init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch1 target4 init4 switch1 target5 

;;;;;;;;;;

PPO, pretrained Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.620, 0.890), (0.620, 0.410) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target3 init0 switch1 target5 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init1 switch0 switch1 target5 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 switch1 target5 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch1 target4 init3 switch1 target5 

init4 switch1 target1 init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch1 target4 init4 switch1 target5 

;;;;;;;;;; PPO, from scratch Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.620, 0.890), (0.620, 0.410) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 switch0 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 target3 init0 switch1 target5 

init1 switch0 target0 init1 switch0 target2 

init1 switch0 switch1 target4 init1 switch0 switch1 target5 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 switch1 target5 

init3 switch1 switch0 target0 init3 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch1 target4 init3 switch1 target5 

init4 switch1 target1 init4 switch1 target3 

init4 switch1 target4 init4 switch1 target5 

;;;;;;;;;;

MCTS, pretrained Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 Blockage4 

Blockage5 Blockage6 

Blockage7 

> switch0 switch1 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 2Switch Positions: (0.620, 0.410), (0.620, 0.890) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 target3 init0 switch0 target5 

init1 switch1 target0 init1 switch1 target2 

init1 switch1 switch0 target4 init1 switch1 switch0 target5 

init2 switch1 switch0 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch0 target3 init2 switch1 switch0 target5 

init3 switch0 switch1 target0 init3 switch0 switch1 target2 

init3 switch0 target4 init3 switch0 target5 

init4 switch0 target1 init4 switch0 target3 

init4 switch0 target4 init4 switch0 target5 

;;;;;;;;;; MCTS, from scratch 

Figure 30: Fine-tuning instance 1. 47 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9  

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.170, 0.470), (0.675, 0.470), (0.650, 0.895) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 

init0 switch0 switch1 target1 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target5 init1 switch2 target0 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch2 target2 init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 switch1 target5 init3 switch1 switch2 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 target5 init4 switch1 target1 

init4 switch1 switch0 target3 init4 switch1 switch0 target4 

init4 switch1 target5 

;;;;;;;;;

PPO, pretrained Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.675, 0.470), (0.650, 0.895), (0.180, 0.470) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init0 switch2 switch0 target1 init0 switch2 target3 

init0 switch2 switch0 target5 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target2 init1 switch2 target4 

init1 switch2 switch0 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init2 switch1 target2 init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target3 

init2 switch1 switch0 target5 init3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch0 switch1 target2 init3 switch0 switch2 target4 

init3 switch0 target5 init4 switch0 target1 

init4 switch0 switch2 target3 init4 switch0 switch2 target4 

init4 switch0 target5 

;;;;;;;;; PPO, from scratch Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9  

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.180, 0.470), (0.675, 0.470), (0.665, 0.895) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 

init0 switch0 switch1 target1 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target5 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 init1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 target5 init2 switch2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch2 target2 init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 switch1 target5 init3 switch1 switch2 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 target5 init4 switch1 target1 

init4 switch1 switch0 target3 init4 switch1 switch0 target4 

init4 switch1 target5 

;;;;;;;;

MCTS, pretrained Blockage0 

Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.675, 0.470), (0.665, 0.895), (0.185, 0.470) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init0 switch2 switch0 target1 init0 switch2 target3 

init0 switch2 switch0 target5 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target0 

init1 switch2 switch0 switch1 target2 init1 switch2 target4 

init1 switch2 switch0 target5 init2 switch1 switch0 target1 

init2 switch1 target2 init2 switch1 switch0 switch2 target3 

init2 switch1 switch0 target5 init3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch0 switch1 target2 init3 switch0 switch2 target4 

init3 switch0 target5 init4 switch0 target1 

init4 switch0 switch2 target3 init4 switch0 switch2 target4 

init4 switch0 target5 

;;;;;;;; MCTS, from scratch 

Figure 31: Fine-tuning instance 2. 48 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6
> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.160, 0.470), (0.645, 0.135), (0.645, 0.470), (0.645, 0.900) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 

init0 switch0 switch2 target1 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch2 switch1 target5 init1 switch3 target0 

init1 switch3 target2 init1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch0 switch2 switch1 target5 

init2 switch3 switch2 target1 init2 switch3 target2 

init2 switch3 switch2 switch0 target3 

init2 switch3 switch2 switch1 target5 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 target2 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 init3 switch1 target5 

init4 switch2 target1 init4 switch2 switch0 target3 

init4 switch2 switch0 target4 init4 switch2 switch1 target5 

;;;;;;;

PPO, pretrained Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6
> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10  

> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.210, 0.470), (0.635, 0.470), (0.635, 0.900) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch1 switch2 target0 

init0 switch0 switch1 target1 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch1 target5 init1 switch2 target0 

init1 switch2 target2 init1 switch2 switch1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch2 switch1 target5 init2 switch2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch2 target2 init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 switch1 target5 init3 switch1 switch2 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch1 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 target5 init4 switch1 target1 

init4 switch1 switch0 target3 init4 switch1 switch0 target4 

init4 switch1 target5 

;;;;;;;;;

PPO, from scratch Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6
> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.635, 0.900), (0.635, 0.470), (0.635, 0.135), (0.210, 0.470) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 switch1 switch0 target0 

init0 switch3 switch1 target1 init0 switch3 target3 

init0 switch3 switch1 switch2 target5 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target2 init1 switch0 switch1 switch3 target4 

init1 switch0 switch1 switch2 target5 

init2 switch0 switch1 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch3 target3 

init2 switch0 switch1 switch2 target5 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target0 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch0 target2 

init3 switch2 switch1 switch3 target4 init3 switch2 target5 

init4 switch1 target1 init4 switch1 switch3 target3 

init4 switch1 switch3 target4 init4 switch1 switch2 target5 

;;;;;;;

MCTS, pretrained Blockage0 Blockage1 

Blockage2 

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

> Blockage6
> Blockage7

Blockage8 

Blockage9 

Blockage10 

> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4 target5

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.210, 0.470), (0.645, 0.875), (0.645, 0.135), (0.645, 0.470) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 switch3 switch1 target0 

init0 switch0 switch3 target1 init0 switch0 target3 

init0 switch0 switch3 switch2 target5 

init1 switch0 switch3 switch1 target0 

init1 switch0 switch3 switch1 target2 init1 switch0 target4 

init1 switch0 switch3 switch2 target5 

init2 switch1 switch3 target1 init2 switch1 target2 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch0 target3 

init2 switch1 switch3 switch2 target5 

init3 switch2 switch3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch2 switch3 switch1 target2 

init3 switch2 switch3 switch0 target4 init3 switch2 target5 

init4 switch3 target1 init4 switch3 switch0 target3 

init4 switch3 switch0 target4 init4 switch3 switch2 target5 

;;;;;; MCTS, from scratch 

49 VALIDITY -P RESERVING HIERARCHICAL RL FOR JOINT ROUTING AND SWITCH PLACEMENT IN EDA Blockage0 

> Blockage1
> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13
> Blockage14

Blockage15   

> Blockage16
> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.965, 0.700), (0.198, 0.031), (0.458, 0.748), (0.458, 0.861) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch3 target0 init0 switch3 target1 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch0 target2 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch1 target3 

init0 switch3 switch2 switch0 target4 init1 switch3 target0 

init1 switch3 target1 init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 target2 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch1 target3 

init1 switch3 switch2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch3 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 target3 init2 switch0 target4 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 target0 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 

init4 switch0 switch2 switch3 target0 

init4 switch0 switch2 switch3 target1 init4 switch0 target2 

init4 switch0 switch2 switch1 target3 init4 switch0 target4 

;;;;;;;;

PPO, pretrained Blockage0 

> Blockage1
> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13
> Blockage14

Blockage15   

> Blockage16
> switch0 switch1 switch2 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 3Switch Positions: (0.198, 0.031), (0.458, 0.857), (0.965, 0.700) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 target2 init0 switch1 switch0 target3 

init0 switch1 switch2 target4 init1 switch1 target0 

init1 switch1 target1 init1 switch1 switch2 target2 

init1 switch1 switch0 target3 init1 switch1 switch2 target4 

init2 switch2 switch1 target0 init2 switch2 switch1 target1 

init2 switch2 target2 init2 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init2 switch2 target4 init3 switch0 switch1 target0 

init3 switch0 switch1 target1 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target2 init3 switch0 target3 

init3 switch0 switch1 switch2 target4 

init4 switch2 switch1 target0 init4 switch2 switch1 target1 

init4 switch2 target2 init4 switch2 switch1 switch0 target3 

init4 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;;;;

PPO, from scratch Blockage0 

> Blockage1
> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13
> Blockage14

Blockage15   

> Blockage16
> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

××××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.458, 0.857), (0.198, 0.031), (0.967, 0.297), (0.965, 0.700) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch0 target0 init0 switch0 target1 

init0 switch0 switch3 target2 init0 switch0 switch1 target3 

init0 switch0 switch3 switch2 target4 init1 switch0 target0 

init1 switch0 target1 init1 switch0 switch3 target2 

init1 switch0 switch1 target3 

init1 switch0 switch3 switch2 target4 

init2 switch3 switch0 target0 init2 switch3 switch0 target1 

init2 switch3 target2 init2 switch3 switch2 switch1 target3 

init2 switch3 switch2 target4 init3 switch1 switch0 target0 

init3 switch1 switch0 target1 

init3 switch1 switch2 switch3 target2 init3 switch1 target3 

init3 switch1 switch2 target4 

init4 switch2 switch3 switch0 target0 

init4 switch2 switch3 switch0 target1 

init4 switch2 switch3 target2 init4 switch2 switch1 target3 

init4 switch2 target4 

;;;;;;;;;Blockage0 

> Blockage1
> Blockage2

Blockage3 

Blockage4 

Blockage5 

Blockage6 

Blockage7 

Blockage8 

> Blockage9
> Blockage10

Blockage11 

Blockage12 

> Blockage13
> Blockage14

Blockage15    

> Blockage16
> switch0 switch1 switch2 switch3 init0 init1 init2 init3 init4 target0 target1 target2 target3 target4

×× ××

NETLIST SUMMARY ========================= Total Switches: 4Switch Positions: (0.957, 0.700), (0.240, 0.863), (0.474, 0.864), (0.198, 0.031) Active Route Paths: 

init0 switch1 target0 init0 switch1 switch2 target1 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 

init0 switch1 switch3 target3 

init0 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 

init1 switch2 switch1 target0 init1 switch2 target1 

init1 switch2 switch0 target2 

init1 switch2 switch1 switch3 target3 

init1 switch2 switch0 target4 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 target0 

init2 switch0 switch2 target1 init2 switch0 target2 

init2 switch0 switch2 switch1 switch3 target3 

init2 switch0 target4 init3 switch3 switch1 target0 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch2 target1 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target2 

init3 switch3 target3 

init3 switch3 switch1 switch2 switch0 target4 

;;;;

50