LLBPE: Linked-List Based
GPU-Parallel BPE Tokenizer
Aditya Kovilur
aditya373@icloud.com
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Varun Chandra Shekar
vcs@tamu.edu
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Ariful Azad
ariful@tamu.edu
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
Abstract—Every LLM inference begins with tokenization,
which converts raw input bytes into the discrete token sequence
the model consumes. For text, this step is often implemented using
Byte Pair Encoding (BPE), an algorithm originally introduced for
data compression. BPE has traditionally run on the CPU with
extensive optimization, but recent work has moved it to the GPU
for higher throughput. We show that these GPU implementations
are bottlenecked not by computation but by data movement.
We develop LLBPE that represents the token sequence as an
array-based linked list so that each merge reduces to a constant-
time pointer update. Furthermore, LLBPE fuses rank lookup,
minimum selection, and merging into a single kernel to eliminate
redundant hash map queries. LLBPE achieves up to 5.2× higher
throughput than the best existing GPU implementation and
24.6× over optimized CPU implementations, at the cost of minor
discrepancies in tokenized output.
Index Terms—Tokenization, Natural Language Processing,
High Performance Computing, Parallel Processing
I. INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) sit at the center of con-
temporary machine learning, and their end-to-end inference
pipelines have received extensive optimization. Every such
pipeline begins with the same step. Raw input is split into
discrete units called tokens before the model can process it.
Although tokenization is not the dominant runtime cost of an
individual forward pass, it is executed on every request, and
its overhead accumulates significantly in high-volume serving
environments. Accelerating tokenization is therefore critical
for maximizing overall pipeline throughput.
Given its central role in natural language processing, var-
ious tokenization schemes have been developed, including
WordPiece [1], SentencePiece [2], and Unigram [3]. Among
these, Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) [4], [5] has emerged as the
standard for modern LLMs, powering the GPT family [6] and
leading open-weight models such as Llama [7]. Consequently,
accelerating BPE through GPU parallelism is of high practical
importance.
BPE tokenization has traditionally relied on highly opti-
mized CPU implementations, such as OpenAI’s tiktoken [8]
and Hugging Face Tokenizers [9]. However, CPU-based ap-
proaches are fundamentally constrained by host core counts
and memory transfers. Recent efforts have sought to offload
BPE to the GPU. BlockBPE [10] parallelizes merge passes
within CUDA thread blocks, while GPUTOK [11] maps exact
BPE merge rules directly to GPU hardware. Nevertheless, both
methods maintain a flat array as their underlying sequence
representation, severely limiting their performance scalability.
The primary performance bottleneck in current GPU algo-
rithms lies in excessive data movement. In a flat array, merging
two adjacent tokens requires closing the resulting gap, either
by shifting all downstream elements (as in BlockBPE) or by
copying the sequence to an auxiliary buffer (as in GPUTOK).
Consequently, each merge incurs an O(N) memory overhead
relative to sequence length (N). On a GPU, these global
memory writes are far more expensive than the hash map
lookups and rank comparisons that constitute the actual work
of BPE.
We address this with Linked-List BPE (LLBPE), a parallel
BPE algorithm that represents the token sequence as an array-
based linked list rather than a flat array. In this setting, a
merge becomes a constant-time pointer update touching only
the two tokens being merged, leaving every other position
untouched. We further fuse rank lookup, minimum selection,
and merging into a single kernel so that each hash map value
is retrieved once and reused. On our set of parameters, LLBPE
achieves a peak throughput of 370 MB/s, a 5.2× improvement
over GPUTOK at 71.3 MB/s, while introducing only minor
discrepancies along thread-block boundaries.
This trade-off suits a growing class of deployments.
As LLM serving diversifies into low-latency and high-
volume configurations alongside deep reasoning workloads,
throughput-sensitive settings increasingly prioritize faster pro-
cessing at every pipeline stage over exact output fidelity. The
same applies under heavy request loads, where sustaining
throughput matters more than maximizing model accuracy.
We summarize our main contributions as follows:
• Bottleneck Analysis: We identify global data movement
in flat-array token representations as the primary effi-
ciency bottleneck in existing GPU BPE implementations.
• LLBPE Algorithm: We propose an array-based linked-
list representation that reduces per-merge data movement
from O(N) to O(1), and fuse candidate selection and
merging into a single unified GPU kernel.
• Empirical Evaluation: We evaluate LLBPE against
CPU baselines (tiktoken, Hugging Face Tokenizers) and
GPU implementations (BlockBPE, GPUTOK). LLBPE
arXiv:2610.04951v1  [cs.PF]  4 Oct 2026


achieves peak speedups of 5.2× over prior GPU methods
and 24.6× over CPU-based implementations.
• Implementation: LLBPE is publicly available here. The
setup is mentioned in the Artifact Description section in
the appendix.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Byte Pair Encoding
Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) was introduced by Gage [4] as
a data compression algorithm. Given an input byte sequence,
BPE repeatedly finds the most frequent adjacent pair of bytes,
replaces every occurrence of that pair with a single unused
byte, and records the substitution in a lookup table. This pro-
cess repeats until no pair occurs more than once. The original
sequence can be recovered by replaying the substitutions in
reverse order.
As an example, consider the input string aaabdaaabac.
The pair aa is the most frequent, so it is replaced by an
unused symbol Z, yielding ZabdZabac with the table entry
Z→aa. Next, the pair ab is most frequent. Replacing ab with
Y produces ZYdZYac with the additional entry Y →ab. The
process continues until no pair appears more than once.
Sennrich et al. [5] adapted BPE for subword tokenization in
neural machine translation. It has since become the dominant
tokenization method in large language models including GPT-
4 [12] and LLaMA [13].
B. Training and Encoding Phases
The use of BPE in LLMs typically involves two phases. In
an offline training phase, a fixed-size vocabulary of merge
rules is learned from a training corpus. Starting from a
character-level (or byte-level) vocabulary, the algorithm repeat-
edly counts all adjacent token pairs across the corpus, merges
the most frequent pair into a new token, and appends the rule
to an ordered merge table. This repeats for a predetermined
number of merges (e.g., 50,257 tokens for GPT-2 or 100,256
for GPT-4’s cl100k_base vocabulary). The goal of this
training phase is to learn an ordered merge table that can be
used to tokenize arbitrary text at inference time.
In the encoding (inference) phase, the tokenizer does not
re-count frequencies of new input strings. Instead, it splits the
input into bytes and iteratively scans for adjacent pairs that
appear in the learned merge table. At each step, the pair with
the lowest index (highest priority) in the ordered merge table is
merged, regardless of how many times it occurs in the current
input. This process repeats until no adjacent pair in the current
sequence matches any entry in the merge table. Because every
single byte is always a valid token in the vocabulary, BPE
guarantees that any input can be encoded. This paper focuses
exclusively on parallelizing the BPE encoding phase on the
GPU, taking a pre-trained merge table as a fixed input.
C. Pre tokenization
Modern tokenizers such as OpenAI’s tiktoken and Hug-
gingFace Tokenizers also apply a regex-based pre-tokenization
step before BPE merging. This step splits the input at word
boundaries, whitespace, and punctuation using patterns such
as GPT-2’s splitting regex, ensuring that merges do not cross
word boundaries. Pre-tokenization typically accounts for a
substantial fraction of total tokenization time and is one of
the key challenges in moving BPE to the GPU, since regex
evaluation involves backtracking and branching logic that
resists parallelization.
III. RELATED WORK
A. Tokenization Methods
Subword tokenization is a prerequisite for all modern LLMs,
and three methods dominate in practice. BPE is the most
widely used tokenization method in modern LLMs. It is used
throughout the GPT family [6]. Recent open-weight models
such as Llama 3 [7] also replaced the SentencePiece-BPE
scheme of Llama 1/2 with a larger, tiktoken-style byte-level
BPE vocabulary.
WordPiece is used by BERT-family models [14]. Unlike
BPE, WordPiece performs a left-to-right greedy longest-match
search against a learned vocabulary, consuming the longest
recognized token at each position before advancing. It does
not use a global merge priority and does not consider pairs at
arbitrary positions in the string.
SentencePiece is a tokenization framework that supports
both BPE and Unigram Language Model [15] backends.
They use a single Viterbi (dynamic programming) pass to
find the segmentation that maximizes the probability of the
token distribution. The entire algorithm runs as one dynamic
programming pass over the corpus, without a merging step at
each iteration. Models such as T5 [3] and ALBERT [16] use
SentencePiece with the Unigram backend.
B. CPU-Based Implementations
Several optimized CPU implementations of BPE encoding
exist in the literature. HuggingFace Tokenizers offers a Rust-
based library supporting BPE, WordPiece, and Unigram back-
ends with Python bindings. OpenAI’s tiktoken optimizes BPE
encoding in Rust. fastBPE [17] provides a multithreaded C++
implementation with memory-mapped I/O.
C. GPU-Accelerated Tokenization
Several recent efforts have targeted GPU acceleration of
tokenization. The RAPIDS cuDF library [18] provides a GPU-
based subword tokenizer for WordPiece in BERT pipelines.
BlockBPE [10] proposes a parallel BPE implementation that
replaces regex-based pre-tokenization with byte-level splitting
to enable intra-block parallelism on the GPU GPUTOK [11]
builds on similar ideas to implement GPT-2’s exact merge
rules on the GPU.
IV. METHOD
A. Pre Tokenization
Before applying BPE merges, the input text is split into pre-
tokens such as words and numbers. Pre-tokenization enforces
the semantic rules of the input language, thereby preserving
contextual information. For example, a number such as 1000


Fig. 1: An overview of LLBPE within a thread block. These operations are performed independently in eack block.
should always be tokenized as a single unit rather than split
into 10 and 00. Analogous rules govern punctuation, con-
tractions, and similar constructs. Without this step, the string
sample word could produce tokens such as samp, lewo,
rd, merging the unrelated characters le and wo across a word
boundary and introducing spurious context. Modern tokenizers
implement pre-tokenization by lexing the input stream with a
set of regular expressions that greedily form the longest valid
pre-tokens.
BlockBPE removes pre-tokenization entirely to maximize
GPU performance, at the cost of small deviations in tokeniza-
tion output. Our implementation retains pre-tokenization but
overlaps it with file I/O by processing the input as a stream,
so that pre-tokenized spans are ready for GPU processing as
soon as they are read from disk.
We implement pre-tokenization as a single linear scan over
the input using a pre-computed trie that encodes the tokenizer’s
regular expressions using the Knuth–Morris–Pratt (KMP) al-
gorithm [19]. In this approach, at each node, a valid input
advances to a child node, while a mismatch follows a pre-
computed failure link that falls back to the longest previously
matched suffix. This ensures that every byte is visited at most
a constant number of times. The time complexity of the scan
is O(N + P), where N is the length of the input and P is
the maximum depth of the trie. In practice N ≫P, so the
cost reduces to O(N), which is the same asymptotic cost as
simply copying the input into an array. The pre-tokenization
overhead is therefore amortized over the cost of populating
the token buffer that is subsequently transferred to the GPU.
B. Batching and Thread Mapping
We implement BPE on the GPU by partitioning the input
text into batches. Each batch contains BATCH_SIZE (number
of) substrings, and each substring is of length N = SEQ_LEN
initial tokens (each token is a byte after pre-tokenization and
before the first iteration of BPE). Hence, BATCH_SIZE ×
SEQ_LEN is equal to the total number of bytes processed in
one GPU kernel launch.
We assign each batch to its own thread block of N threads.
As a result, each thread is responsible for exactly one token
at any given point during execution. Since block scheduling is
handled by the CUDA scheduler, our algorithm centers around
how each batch is processed within a thread block.
Since each thread handles exactly one token and we employ
no thread coarsening (in contrast to BlockBPE), sequence
length and batch size are not independent:
SEQ_LEN × BATCH_SIZE = MAX_THREADS,
(1)
where MAX_THREADS is the hardware limit on the number
of threads that the GPU can spawn concurrently. Due to the
limitation of tokenizing an input of MAX_THREADS bytes at a
time, for an input larger than that, we launch the GPU kernel
multiple times. For example, if MAX_THREADS = 200,000
and the input text is of SIZE = 2,100,000 Bytes, we
launch the GPU kernel ceil(SIZE / MAX_THREADS) =
11 times.
C. Overview of the Algorithm
The core of BPE encoding is a loop that repeatedly identifies
the highest-priority adjacent token pair and merges it into a
single token. In a flat array representation, each merge requires
shifting all subsequent elements to close the gap. Such data
shifting is expensive on the GPU, where global memory writes
are costly. We instead emulate a linked list on the GPU, where
each token stores indices to its successor.
Hence, a merge reduces to updating a constant number of
index entries in this linked list. Each merge iteration consists
of three steps, illustrated in Figure 1.
Step 1: Rank evaluation. For each adjacent pair in the
current sequence, look up its merge rank in the pre-trained
table. This step takes O(N) time, where N is the number of
active tokens.
Step 2: Minimum selection. Find the pair with the lowest
rank (highest priority). This can be performed via linear scan
or tree-based reduction, both effectively O(N) in the number
of active tokens.
Step 3: Merge. Replace the selected pair with a single
merged token and update the sequence.
The key difference between our approach and prior GPU
implementations lies in Step 3. BlockBPE stores tokens in


Algorithm 1 BPE Merge Iteration
Input: thread index i, arrays tokens[], nextToken[], merge hash map H, shared variable minRP
▷Phase 1: Rank lookup
1: if nextToken[i] = −1 then
2:
return
▷inactive thread
3: end if
4: j ←nextToken[i]
5: value ←H.lookup(tokens[i], tokens[j])
6: candidate ←(value & 0xFFFFFFFF00000000) ∨i
▷rank (high), position (low)
▷Phase 2: Atomic minimum selection
7: old ←minRP
8: while candidate < old do
9:
prev ←ATOMICCAS(minRP, old, candidate)
10:
if prev = old then
11:
break
12:
end if
13:
old ←prev
14: end while
▷Phase 3: Merge
15: SYNCTHREADS()
16: mergePos ←minRP & 0xFFFFFFFF
▷Lower 32 bits of minRP stores the position
17: if i = mergePos then
18:
tokens[i] ←value & 0xFFFFFFFF
▷Lower 32 bits of value stores merged token ID
19:
nextToken[i] ←nextToken[j]
▷skip consumed node with j = nextToken[i] from Phase 1
20:
nextToken[j] ←−1
▷mark as deleted
21: end if
a flat array and shifts all elements after the merge position
left by one, making Step 3 O(N). GPUTOK uses a double-
buffered array, copying all N elements into a second buffer
in every iteration, which is also O(N). In LLBPE’s linked-
list representation, Step 3 is O(1) because exactly one thread
updates the merged token’s value and redirects its successor
pointer to skip the consumed neighbor.
D. Data Structures
LLBPE relies on two GPU-resident data structures: a hash
map encoding the pre-trained merge table and a pair of parallel
arrays representing the token sequence as a linked list.
Merge Tables. We store the merge table as a GPU-resident
hash map using cuCollections, passed as a parameter to the
merge kernel. Each entry of the hash map encodes a token
pair and its merge rule in two 64-bit integers:
1) Key (64-bit unsigned integer): The upper 32 bits store
tokeni and the lower 32 bits store tokeni+1, packing an
adjacent pair into a single 64-bit lookup key.
2) Value (64-bit unsigned integer): The upper 32 bits store
the merge rank and the lower 32 bits store the resulting
merged token ID.
This value layout, also used by GPUTOK, has a useful
property. Because the rank occupies the upper bits, a numeric
minimum over raw 64-bit values is equivalent to selecting
the lowest rank. The minimum simultaneously yields both the
winning rank and the corresponding merged token ID in a
single comparison, with no additional lookup required. Since
all ranks in the merge table are distinct, ties cannot occur.
Token Sequence. The token sequence is represented as a
linked list using two parallel arrays:
• tokens[i]: the ID of the i-th token in the current
sequence.
• nextToken[i]: the index of the successor of position
i in the tokens array. A value of −1 indicates a deleted
node (consumed by a merge) or the end of a pre-token
boundary.
Each thread owns exactly one position in the linked list,
accessing only its corresponding entries in the tokens and
next arrays. This one-to-one mapping eliminates memory
access conflicts between threads and ensures coalesced reads
when thread indices are contiguous. A merge operation up-
dates at most three entries, leaving all other array positions
untouched.
E. The Merge Iteration
Each merge iteration identifies the adjacent token pair with
the lowest merge rank, merges it into a single token, and
updates the linked list accordingly. Algorithm 1 shows the
complete iteration, executed by every thread in parallel. Rank
lookup, minimum selection, and the merge itself are fused into


(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: An illustration of the merge process
a single kernel so that the hash map value retrieved in Phase 1
can be reused in Phase 3 without a second query.
Phase 1: Rank lookup (lines 1–6). A thread is active
in a given iteration if nextToken[i]̸ = −1, meaning a
prior merge has not consumed its token and it has a valid
successor to form a pair with. Each active thread looks up
its adjacent pair (tokens[i], tokens[j]) in the hash map,
where j = nextToken[i], and caches the returned 64-bit
value. The thread then constructs a candidate word by masking
off the lower 32 bits of the value and substituting its own
position i, leaving the rank in place in the upper 32 bits.
In principle, only two pairs change between iterations (the
pair formed by the newly merged token and its successor,
and the pair formed by the predecessor and the newly merged
token), so unchanged pairs could skip this lookup. As an
optimization, all active threads perform the lookup during
initialization. On subsequent iterations, only the threads whose
pairs were modified by the previous merge repeat it, while
the rest reuse their cached values. This reduces the number
of hash map queries per iteration from O(N) to O(1) after
initialization.
Phase 2: Atomic minimum selection (lines 7–14). Every
active thread attempts to insert its candidate into the shared-
memory variable minRP using an atomic compare-and-swap
(CAS) loop. Because the rank occupies the upper 32 bits,
a numeric comparison on the packed word is equivalent to
comparing by rank and breaking ties by position. Since all
merge ranks are distinct, the final value of minRP uniquely
identifies both the winning rank and the merge position.
Note that our reduction is asymptotically similar to the tree-
based reduction used in GPUTOK which has O(N) time com-
plexity. However, we found that the tree-based approach in-
troduces multiple synchronization barriers per iteration, which
makes it expensive in practice. By contrast, our flat atomic
approach avoids inter-thread synchronization entirely, relying
instead on atomic operations that are efficiently serialized by
the hardware.
Phase 3: Merge (lines 15–21). After a barrier synchro-
nization, every thread reads the winning position from the
lower 32 bits of minRP. The thread whose position matches
performs the merge. In the merging phase, the thread extracts
the merged token ID from the lower 32 bits of its cached hash
map value, writes it to tokens[i], redirects nextToken[i]
past the consumed neighbor j, and sets nextToken[j] ←−1
to mark j as deleted. Both j and the cached value are per-
thread registers held since Phase 1, so no additional memory
TABLE I: Sizes of datasets
Dataset
Size
War and Peace
3.2 MB
Tom Sawyer
420 KB
Huckleberry Finn
600 KB
reads or hash map queries are needed.
Figure 2 illustrates the merging process with an example.
If the pair "h", "i" has the highest merge priority, the two
tokens merge to form "hi" and thread #2 becomes inactive
for all subsequent iterations. Only the pairs {"w", "hi"}
and {"hi", "c"} require new rank lookups in the following
iteration (Figure 2b).
Block-boundary handling. We restrict merging within each
thread block because cross-block merges require expensive
inter-block synchronization through global memory barriers,
which significantly reduces tokenization throughput. Conse-
quently, pairs that straddle a block boundary are never merged,
which can yield tokenizations that differ from a strictly serial
implementation. Section V-B quantifies how often this occurs
and its effect on tokenization quality.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Settings
a) Dataset: We evaluate the tokenizer on several corpora
drawn from Tolstoy’s War and Peace[20], Mark Twain’s Tom
Sawyer [21], and Huckleberry Finn [22]. The sizes of all these
datasets are discussed in Table I.
b) Platform: All experiments were run on a GPU node
of the Perlmutter supercomputer at NERSC. Specifically, we
used an NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80GB of memory, paired
with an AMD EPYC 7763 CPU (64 cores, 256GB DDR4
DRAM). Perlmutter uses a PCIe 4.0 interconnect for the CPU-
GPU data transfer with a bidirectional bandwidth of 64GBps.
The A100 supports approximately 200K concurrently resident
threads, which upper-bounds the product of sequence length
and batch size in our experiments.
c) Configuration: We use CUDA 12.9 and gcc-native
12.3 for compilation. We also use cmake 3.30.4 for compiling
cuCollections with the corresponding version of CUDA. We
use the GPT-2 [23] tokenization vocabulary and merge table
for all baselines and LLBPE.
d) Baselines: We compare against tiktoken and Hug-
gingFace. These are CPU-based implementations; hence, we
run them on the AMD EPYC 7763 CPU as mentioned
above. BlockBPE and GPUTOK are GPU implementations
and are tested on NVIDIA A100. As there is no publicly
available implementation of the original BlockBPE paper, we
use the BlockBPE implementation from GPUTOK. Tiktoken,
HuggingFace, and BlockBPE are Rust implementations with
Python interfaces. GPUTOK and LLBPE are C++ implemen-
tations.
B. Tokenization Quality
Since our aim is not to improve tokenization accuracy, we
instead evaluate how closely our tokenizer’s output matches


Fig. 3: Comparison of similarity scores for LLBPE and
HuggingFace outputs.
that of the trusted HuggingFace BPE tokenizer, which we
adopt as the reference. The goal is to show that LLBPE
tokenization matches closely with the HuggingFace BPE tok-
enizer.
Following the methodology of BlockBPE, we quantify the
similarity between two tokenizers’ outputs by computing the
normalized Levenshtein distance between our output and that
of HuggingFace. For each input string si, the similarity score
is defined as:
sim(si) = 1 −dL
 tHF
i , tLL
i

|si|
,
(2)
where dL(tHF
i , tLL
i ) is the Levenshtein distance [24] between
the HuggingFace tokenization tHF
i
and the LLBPE tokenization
tLL
i
for string si, and |si| denotes the number of tokens in si.
Here, the Levenshtein distance measures the minimum number
of single-token insertions, deletions, and substitutions required
to transform one token sequence into the other, providing
a standard measure of edit-based dissimilarity between two
sequences. A similarity score of 1 indicates that the two
tokenizations are identical, while lower values indicate a
greater number of edits needed to reconcile the two outputs.
The final similarity is reported as the mean of sim(si) over
all chunks in the corpus.
Figure 3 shows that LLBPE is comparable to HuggingFace
BPE, with similarity scores close to 99% for Tom Sawyer and
Huckleberry Finn, and 96% for War and Peace. We note that
these differences do not indicate inferior accuracy on the part
of LLBPE. They simply mean that LLBPE generates slightly
different tokens than HuggingFace does.
The reason for these differences is that token pairs lying at
block boundaries are not compared across blocks when evalu-
ating merge rank in order to ensure that the algorithm operates
strictly within a block for high performance. Consequently,
certain merges are missed whenever a boundary token pair has
the highest merge priority, introducing a discrepancy between
the algorithm’s output and the ground-truth tokenization. This
does not cause any data loss, as it merely leaves some tokens
split at the block boundary.
Fig. 4: Peak throughput comparison of LLBPE with
tiktoken, HuggingFace, BlockBPE and GPUTOK over
varying sequence lengths.
Figure 3 also reveals that similarity improves with a higher
sequence length. This is expected because a higher sequence
length results in a smaller batch size for a fixed thread budget.
This corresponds to fewer blocks on the GPU and conse-
quently fewer block boundaries, reducing the opportunities for
merges to be missed at those boundaries.
C. Tokenization Throughput
We define throughput as the number of bytes a tokenizer
processes per unit time, reported in MB/s. Formally, given a
corpus of total size B bytes and a measured runtime t (in
seconds), throughput is computed as
Throughput (MB/s) =
B
106 × t,
(3)
where B denotes the total number of bytes in the corpus and
t denotes the runtime of the program.
We compare LLBPE with two widely used CPU baselines,
tiktoken and Hugging Face, and two recently developed GPU
BPE implementations, BlockBPE and GPUTOK. As discussed
previously, the product of batch size and sequence length
equals the maximum number of threads in LLBPE. Conse-
quently, as sequence length increases, batch size decreases
proportionally. Figure 4 presents the throughput results across
various sequence lengths.
All reported numbers in Figure 4 correspond to the merge
kernel, which does not include the file I/O required for reading
the corpus. The GPU-based baselines skip pre-tokenization,
hence the results shown are a direct comparison between the
merge kernels. However, the CPU-based baselines run pre-
tokenization as the first step on a string buffer passed as input
after the corpus is read. Since we perform pre-tokenization on
a streamed input, we were unable to show a direct comparison
of the effect of pre-tokenization on the end to end execution
time with the CPU-based baselines.
a) Overall throughput: Figure 4 shows that the GPU
tokenizers, LLBPE, BlockBPE, and GPUTOK, consistently


perform much better than the highly-optimized CPU tokeniz-
ers from OpenAI and HuggingFace, across all batch sizes and
sequence lengths. This is not surprising, given the massive
parallelization available on the GPU compared to multicore
CPUs. Between the CPU baselines, tiktoken achieves higher
throughput than HuggingFace across all experiments. Be-
tween the two GPU baselines, GPUTOK slightly outperforms
BlockBPE. However, across all experiments, LLBPE performs
significantly better than both GPUTOK and BlockBPE. In the
best case (sequence length 128), LLBPE achieves a throughput
of 370 MB/s, which is 7× faster than GPUTOK and ∼20×
faster than tiktoken. In the worst case (sequence length 1024),
LLBPE achieves 38.7 MB/s, which is 2× faster than GPUTOK
and ∼2.5× faster than tiktoken. Hence, LLBPE performs the
best overall across all configurations explored in this paper.
b) Throughput with respect to Sequence length: Sweep-
ing across various sequence lengths, we notice much higher
throughput values for lower sequence lengths and higher batch
sizes. The difference between the throughputs at sequence
lengths 128 and 1024 is an order of magnitude, and this can be
attributed to the warp scheduling having a lower overhead for
shorter sequence lengths. The most expensive step of LLBPE
is the global memory access for merge ranks, which triggers
a warp scheduler to hide the latency caused by it. A shorter
sequence length corresponds to a smaller block size, i.e. a
sequence length of 128 would correspond to 128 threads in
each GPU block. Consequently, it has a direct impact on the
number of warps within a block. Therefore, the shorter the
sequence length, the fewer the warps within a GPU, which
leads to easier latency-hiding scheduling between warps. This
is because block scheduling takes precedence once all warps
are idle, which happens sooner if there are fewer warps.
VI. CONCLUSION
We presented LLBPE, a GPU-accelerated BPE tokenizer
that achieves a peak throughput of 370 MB/s (with our con-
figuration), a 5.2× improvement over the next best baseline,
GPUTOK, at 71.3 MB/s. The performance gain follows from
a single design principle. Because BPE encoding involves
only hash map lookups and rank comparisons, its cost on the
GPU is dominated by data movement rather than computation.
LLBPE minimizes this movement by representing the token
sequence as an array-based linked list, reducing each merge
from an O(N) array shift to an O(1) pointer update. Addi-
tionally, LLBPE fuses rank lookup, minimum selection, and
merging into a single kernel so that hash map values retrieved
once are reused without re-querying global memory.
Although tokenization is not the dominant cost of LLM
inference, it is performed on every input and at high frequency
in serving pipelines. Accelerating it on the GPU also keeps
token sequences resident in device memory, avoiding host-to-
device transfers in workloads where the downstream model
already runs on the GPU.
LLBPE has one notable limitation. Merges are confined to
thread block boundaries, so pairs straddling adjacent blocks
are never merged. This introduces minor discrepancies relative
to the reference HuggingFace tokenizer output, and in this
work, we do not study the impact of this difference in the
downstream tasks of LLMs. Extending LLBPE to resolve
cross-block merges without sacrificing throughput, for exam-
ple through a lightweight boundary fix-up pass, is a natural
direction for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded in part by DOE grants DE-
SC0022098 and DE-SC0023349 and by NSF grants PPoSS
CCF 2316233 and OAC-2339607. Claude AI was utilized for
grammar enhancement.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Wu, M. Schuster, Z. Chen, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, W. Macherey,
M. Krikun, Y. Cao, Q. Gao, K. Macherey, J. Klingner, A. Shah,
M. Johnson, X. Liu, Łukasz Kaiser, S. Gouws, Y. Kato, T. Kudo,
H. Kazawa, K. Stevens, G. Kurian, N. Patil, W. Wang, C. Young,
J. Smith, J. Riesa, A. Rudnick, O. Vinyals, G. Corrado, M. Hughes,
and J. Dean, “Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging
the Gap between Human and Machine Translation,” 2016. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144
[2] T. Kudo and J. Richardson, “SentencePiece: A simple and language
independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for Neural Text
Processing,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations,
E. Blanco and W. Lu, Eds.
Brussels, Belgium: Association for
Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2018, pp. 66–71. [Online]. Available:
https://aclanthology.org/D18-2012/
[3] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena,
Y. Zhou, W. Li, and P. J. Liu, “Exploring the Limits of Transfer
Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer,” pp. 1–53, oct 2019.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683
[4] P. Gage, “A new algorithm for data compression,” The C Users Journal,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 23–38, 1994.
[5] R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch, “Neural Machine Translation of
Rare Words with Subword Units,” in Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers).
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016, pp.
1715–1725.
[6] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A.
Neelakantan,
P.
Shyam,
G.
Sastry,
A.
Askell,
S.
Agarwal,
A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh,
D. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler,
M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish,
A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei, “Language models are
few-shot learners,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and
H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 1877–
1901. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/
paper/2020/file/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf
[7] Llama Team, AI @ Meta, “The Llama 3 Herd of Models,” 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783
[8] OpenAI, “tiktoken,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
openai/tiktoken
[9] A. Moi and N. Patry, “HuggingFace’s Tokenizers,” 2025. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/huggingface/tokenizers
[10] A. You, “BlockBPE: Parallel BPE Tokenization,” 2025. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.11941
[11] V. G. Kadamba and K. Jaisankar, “GPUTOK: GPU Accelerated
Byte Level BPE Tokenization,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2603.02597
[12] OpenAI, “GPT-4 Technical Report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774,
2023.
[13] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux,
T. Lacroix, B. Rozi`ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar et al.,
“Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.


[14] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding,” in
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL-HLT), 2019.
[15] T.
Kudo,
“Subword
Regularization:
Improving
Neural
Network
Translation
Models
with
Multiple
Subword
Candidates,”
2018.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.10959
[16] Z.
Lan,
M.
Chen,
S.
Goodman,
K.
Gimpel,
P.
Sharma,
and
R. Soricut, “ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning
of
Language
Representations,”
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1909.11942
[17] R. Sennrich, B. Haddow, and A. Birch, “fastBPE,” 2019. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/glample/fastBPE
[18] RAPIDS
Development
Team,
“RAPIDS
cuDF:
GPU
DataFrame
library,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/rapidsai/cudf
[19] D. E. Knuth, J. H. Morris, Jr., and V. R. Pratt, “Fast Pattern Matching
in Strings,” SIAM Journal on Computing, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 323–350,
1977. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1137/0206024
[20] L. Tolstoy, War and Peace.
Project Gutenberg, 1869.
[21] M. Twain, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer.
Project Gutenberg, 1876.
[22] ——, Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
Project Gutenberg, 1884.
[23] OpenAI.
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/openai/gpt-2/blob/
master/download model.py
[24] V. I. Levenshtein, “Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, inser-
tions, and reversals,” in Soviet physics doklady, vol. 10, no. 8, 1966, pp.
707–710.
APPENDIX
a) Abstract: This artifact contains the implementation for
LLBPE in C++. We provide instructions on generating results
for Figures 3, 4.
b) Artifact Description: : The code for LLBPE can be
found here. The testing was done on an NVIDIA A100 GPU
on NERSC’s Perlmutter on an interactive GPU node. The setup
instructions for our platform are mentioned below and can also
be found in README.md in the root directory.
Note: The project can be compiled using the script in
scripts/build.sh. The executable generated by running
the build script is present in build/ and can be run with the
following arguments: .
./build/LLBPE <input-file> \
<output-file|stdout> <mode(SEQ|BATCH)> \
<mode-value>
1) input-file: File address of the corpus to tokenize
2) output-file: File address to store the tokenized output
3) mode: SEQ/BATCH to specify which parameter is fixed
a) SEQ: sequence length
b) BATCH: batch size
4) mode-value: Value of the parameter specified in ¡mode¿
c) Modules: These commands and versions are specific
to the platform on which we run our tests.
module load cuda # CUDA 12.9
module load gcc-native/12.3
module unload cray-mpich
module load mpich
d) Build: The commands provided below are included in
the build script:
mkdir -p build
cd ./build
cmake ..
make
